[Introduction sequence - The introduction to this first episode is longer than the standard sequence that introduces the rest of the Avatar episodes. It contains more background than the standard sequence. The animation contains some additions to accommodate the longer narrative. The trip through the map to the Fire Nation amphibious assault is longer, the shot of the Avatar silhouetted by the sun is longer, and the third paragraph below is accompanied by a pan right shot over a still frame that shows a burning landscape ravaged by war. Also, the narration around the departure of her father is voiced over shots of the Water Tribe ships departing, and of a younger Katara and Sokka watching them leave. Lastly, the stone pinnacle on which Aang stands in future episodes is empty.]

Katara (voice over): Water... Earth... Fire... Air...

My grandmother used to tell me stories about the old days, a time of peace when the Avatar kept balance between the Water Tribes, Earth Kingdom, Fire Nation, and Air Nomads. But that all changed when the Fire Nation attacked.

Only the Avatar mastered all four elements. Only he could stop the ruthless firebenders. But when the world needed him most, he vanished.

A hundred years have passed and the Fire Nation is nearing victory in the war. Two years ago, my father and the men of my tribe journeyed to the Earth Kingdom to help fight against the Fire Nation, leaving me and my brother to look after our tribe.

Some people believe that the Avatar was never reborn into the Air Nomads and that the cycle is broken, but I haven't lost hope. I still believe that somehow the Avatar will return to save the world.



Act I

(The show opens with an overhead shot of iceberg laden waters. The screen pans left and rotates showing footprints in the snow, then fades to soaring pan shot from the air of the icy waters. As if the shot were taken from the outside of an airplane, the camera banks left as it moves forward. It comes to rest and slowly zooms in on a two person canoe out among the icebergs. Cut to a closer shot of the canoe. A teenage boy, Sokka, shaven headed except for a pony tail, stands in the canoe. He looks down at the water, spear at the ready. The other occupant is a young girl. Both wear blue overcoats. The canoe drifts slowly as the boy concentrates on fishing. Cut to a close, overhead shot of the canoe. Beside the boat a fish swims close to the surface in front of the boy.)

Sokka: It's not getting away from me this time. Watch and learn, Katara. This is how you catch a fish.

(Katara leans over the edge of the canoe to see a fish. Hesitantly, she removes her left glove. She takes a deep breather and with a look of trepidation begins to motion with her exposed hand. Suddenly, a globe of water containing the fish bursts out of the water.)

Katara: Sokka, look!
Sokka: (whispers) Shhh. Katara, you're gonna scare it away. Mmmm... I can already smell it cookin'!
Katara (trying to retain control of the globe of water): But Sokka! I caught one!

(She struggles with the blob of water and it floats closer to Sokka, who raises his spear to strike a fish. When he cocks his arm back he burst the bubble of water. The fish falls back into the sea and Sokka gets drenched.)

Katara: Hey!
Sokka (very exasperated): Ugh! Why is it that every time you play with magic water I get soaked?
Katara: It's not magic. It's waterbending, and it's-
Sokka: Yeah, yeah, an ancient art unique to our culture, blah blah blah. Look, I'm just saying that if I had weird powers, I'd keep my weirdness to myself.
Katara: You're calling me weird? I'm not the one who makes muscles at myself every time I see my reflection in the water.

(Cut to Sokka, who is making a muscle and looking at his reflection in the water. He turns to Katara and gives her a look. Suddenly the boat is bumped, they look up to see they have entered an ice packed area. The begin to work frantically to maneuver the canoe between the icebergs.)

Katara and Sokka: Ahhh!
Katara: Watch out! Go left! Go left!

(Cut to an overhead shot of the canoe as it threads its way through the ice pack. Icebergs are colliding all around them. Each time they manage to avoid getting crushed between the colliding icebergs, but their safety margins decreases rapidly each time. Finally the canoe is crushed when three icebergs collide at once. Sokka and Katara jump out in time onto one of the icebergs. Cut to a wide shot of the ice field. They are now at the mercy of the currents. Then cut back to the kids.)

Katara: You call that left?
Sokka: You don't like my steering. Well, maybe you should have waterbended us out of the ice.

(Cut to a wide shot of the kids on their little iceberg. Behind them a huge towering iceberg rears up into the sky.)

Katara: So it's my fault?
Sokka: I knew I should have left you home. Leave it to a girl to screw things up.

(Cut to a close of up Katara, her anger boiling over. She points at her brother.)

Katara: You are the most sexist, immature, nut brained...

(As she gets more excited, the iceberg on which they are sitting begins to heave. Switch to a wider shot, where the huge iceberg behind her cracks.)

Katara: Ugh, I'm embarrassed to be related to you! Ever since Mom died I've been doing all the work around camp while you've been off playing soldier!
Sokka (noticing the cracking iceberg): Uh... Katara?
Katara: I even wash all the clothes! Have you ever smelled your dirty socks? Let me tell you, NOT PLEASANT!
Sokka: Katara! Settle down!
Katara: No, that's it. I'm done helping you. From now on, you're on your own!

(By the end she is screaming. As she finishes, the iceberg behind her splits open entirely. It disintegrates and the major pieces fall into the water, pushing their iceberg away. They hold on desperately until the iceberg settles.)

Sokka: Okay, you've gone from weird to freakish, Katara.
Katara: You mean I did that?
Sokka: Yup. Congratulations.

(They both are leaning over the edge of the iceberg raft. Suddenly, the water just in front of them begins to glow an incandescent blue. They move backwards on their raft as another, lighter colored iceberg breaks the surface. It is unclear whether this is part of the one Katara broke up or not. As the new iceberg settles, Katara walks to edge of their iceberg raft to get a better look. Deep in the ice, the figure of a boy in a meditation pose is seen. He has white arrows on his fists and on his bald head. Suddenly, his eyes glow and his arrow markings glow white.)

Katara: He's alive! We have to help.

(She grabs Sokka's hockey stick type spear, pulls down her hood and turns to go to the boy.)

Sokka: Katara! Get back here! We don't know what that thing is!

(Katara ignores him and skips across a few little icebergs to arrive at the one in which the boy is trapped. Sokka follows. She begins to use the hockey stick to whack the ice. After a few big whacks, she cracks open the ice. It looks like air is released, as if the iceberg had a hollow chamber within it, but it is not entirely clear. The iceberg then cracks from top to bottom and explodes open. A huge shaft of white blue light shoots straight into the heavens. Cut to a quick shot of the iceberg from underwater where it glows brightly, then to shot an above ground shot from somewhere nearby where the shaft of light and the aurora australis is clearly seen in the background. The foreground is occupied by a herd of tiger seals, who rear themselves up and roar at the phenomenon.

Cut to a view of an iron hulled battleship with a spiked prow cutting through the sea also nearby. It is apparently steam powered as it has a single smokestack. The foredeck is much longer than the afterdeck. The bridge appears to be several decks above the main deck. Cut to a shot of the back of a young man on the foredeck dressed in red, also shaven-headed except for a pony-tail, staring intently at the shaft of light in front of the ship. Then cut to a shot of his face, still illuminated by the shaft of light. The left side of his face is badly scarred around his left eye. This is Prince Zuko. The light from the light shaft dissipates.)

Zuko: Finally. (He turns to address someone o.c.) Uncle, do you realize what this means?

(Cut to an old man seated cross legged at a low table, drinking tea and playing a game involving domino like objects.)

Iroh: I won't get to finish my game?
Zuko: It means my search - it's about to come to an end.

(Iroh groans.)

Zuko: That light came from an incredibly powerful source. It has to be him!
Iroh: Or it's just the celestial lights. We've been down this road before, Prince Zuko. I don't want you to get too excited over nothing. Please, sit. Why don't you enjoy a cup of calming jasmine tea?
Zuko (exploding in anger): I don't need any calming tea! I need to capture the Avatar. Helmsman, head a course for the light!

(Cut back to a wide shot of the exploded iceberg, which quickly shifts to Sokka still shielding his sister from the blast that just dissipated. They look up to see residual blue light still swirling around the top of what is left of the iceberg. Suddenly, the boy appears, his eyes and arrow markings still aglow.)

Sokka (raising his spear at the boy): Stop!

(The boy stands up as the glow and residual energy fades. He seems to pass out and slides down the side of the ruined iceberg to Sokka and Katara, who lunges forward and catches him as he falls. Sokka pokes Aang in the head with the blunt end of his weapon.)

Katara: Stop it!

(She gives Sokka the Heisman and turns to the boy. She gently turns him over so that he is lying on his back. He begins to wake up. He slowly opens his eyes and the camera switches to the boy's p.o.v. to show his view of Katara. A breeze gently blows her braids and we hear him intake a breath.)

Aang (whispering in a weak voice): I need to ask you something.
Katara: What?
Aang (still whispering): Please... come closer.
Katara: What is it?
Aang (in a normal, even excited voice): Will you go penguin sledding with me?
Katara: Uh... sure. I guess.

(Aang airbends himself to his feet as he starts to rub the back of his head.)

Sokka: Ahh!
Aang: What's going on here?
Sokka: You tell us! How'd you get in the ice? (Poking Aang with his spear) And why aren't you frozen?
Aang (batting the spear anway, absently): I'm not sure.

(Aang gasps as a low, animal like noise is heard from o.c. and begins to frantically climb back up the ruined iceberg. He jumps over the lip of what is in fact now a crater and lands on a huge furry animal.)

Aang: Appa! Are you all right? Wake up, buddy.

(He leans down and opens one of the beasts eyes. He closes it again. Aang hops down and tries to lift the animal's huge head, but without effect. Katara and Sokka come around the corner and their mouths drop in shock as the see the monster, whose mouth opens and licks the boy trying to wake him up.)

Aang: Haha! You're okay!

(He hugs Appa, then cut to a wide shot of the destroyed iceberg. Appa occupies most of the crater left by the explosion. He is a huge flying bison with six legs and horns like a steer. He gets up and shakes himself off a bit.)

Sokka: What is that thing?
Aang: This is Appa, my flying bison.
Sokka: Right. And this is Katara, my flying sister.

(Aang is about to reply, but doesn't as Appa begins to sneeze. Aang ducks in time as Appa proceeds to sneeze all over Sokka.)

Sokka: Ewww! Aahh!!!

(Sokka, covered in snot, tries to get rid of it by rolling around on the ice and snow.)

Aang: Don't worry. It'll wash out.
Sokka: Ugh!
Aang: So, do you guys live around here?
Sokka: Don't answer that! Did you see that crazy bolt of light? He was probably trying to signal the Fire Navy.
Katara: Oh, yeah, I'm sure he's a spy for the Fire Navy. You can tell by that evil look in his eye.

(Cut to a shot of Aang's innocent face, his smile accompanied by a funny sound effect.)

Katara: The paranoid one is my brother, Sokka. You never told us your name.
Aang: I'm A... aaaahhhh... ahhhhhh.... aaah aaah aaah AAAAAAACHOOOO!

(As Aang sneezes he zooms of the ground far into the air. He responds to her question after he lands to the whistling sound of a bomb dropping.)

Aang: I'm Aang. (He sniffles and rubs his nose.)
Sokka: (incredulous) You just sneezed... and flew ten feet in the air.
Aang: Really? It felt higher that that.
Katara (gasping): You're an airbender!
Aang: Sure am.
Sokka: Giant light beams... flying bison... airbenders... I think I've got Midnight Sun Madness. I'm going home to where stuff makes sense.

(Sokka turns to walk off, but is stopped at the iceberg's edge. The camera zooms way out to show how desolate the area is. Just sea and ice.)

Aang: Well, if you guys are stuck Appa and I can give you a lift.

(Aang airbends himself onto Appa's head, then to the top of his back where rests an enormous saddle. Reigns are attached to both of Appa's great horns.)

Katara: We'd love a ride! Thanks! (She gets on Appa.)
Sokka: Oh, no... I am not getting on that fluffy snot monster.
Katara: Are you hoping some other kind of monster will come along and give you a ride home? You know... before you freeze to death?

(Sokka starts to say something and gives up before he does. He sighs. Cut to Katara and Sokka in the back part of the saddle. Katara looks excited. Sokka looks grumpy, arms folded across his chest.)

Aang: Okay. First time flyers, hold on tight! Appa, yip yip!

(Aang shakes the reigns and Appa makes a low rumble. Cut to a rear shot of Appa. He flaps his huge beaver tail and then launches into the air. He spreads his legs wide, but then comes right back down into the water with a huge splash. He begins to swim them forward.)

Aang (shaking the reigns again): Come on, Appa. Yip yip.
Sokka: Wow. That was truly amazing.
Aang: Appa's just tired. A little rest and he'll be soaring through the sky. You'll see.

(He makes a “soaring through the sky” motion with his hand, his eyes finally resting on Katara. He leaves them there, a smile on his face as he looks at her.)

Katara: Why are you smiling at me like that?
Aang: Oh... I was smiling?
Sokka (disgusted): Uuuuugh.

(Cut to a shot of Appa swimming through the water, flopping his tale. Fade back to Prince Zuko's Fire Navy ship. Zuko, on the spotting deck off the bridge looking forward, is approached by Iroh. It is now night.)

Iroh: I'm going to bed now. (He makes an exaggerated yawn) Yep. A man needs his rest. Prince Zuko, you need some sleep. Even if you're right and the Avatar is alive, you won't find him. Your father, grandfather, and great-grandfather all tried and failed.
Zuko: Because their honor didn't hinge on the Avatar's capture. Mine does. This coward's hundred years in hiding are over.

(Fade back to a long shot of Appa swimming, his friends on his back. Cut to a closer, overhead shot. Aang lies back on top of Appa's head. Katara, in the saddle on Appa's back with her brother, crawls forward and looks down from the saddle at Aang.)

Katara: Hey.
Aang: Hey. Whatcha thinkin' about?
Katara: I guess I was wondering – your being an airbender and all – if you had any idea what happened to the Avatar.
Aang (looking disconcerted): Uhh... no. I didn't know him... I mean, I knew people that knew him, but I didn't. Sorry.
Katara: Okay. Just curious. Goodnight.
Aang: Sleep tight.

(Katara turns away and the camera zooms up to Aang, who also looks away, an expression of fear on his face. Cut to a long shot of Appa swimming again before a cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(The show returns to Aang in a dream. The colors are grays, crèmes and pale browns. He wakes up on top of Appa and the view rotates with Aang in Appa's saddle, then cut to Aang struggling against Appa's reigns with heavy rain coming down.)

Aang: Aaahhh!

(Cut to an underwater shot, where Aang and Appa suddenly penetrate the surface and enter the watery depths. They come up briefly for air, Appa groans, but they are once again driven under the storm tossed waves. As they drift downward, Aang drops Appa's reigns and begins to lose consciousness. Suddenly, Aang's eyes and markings glow white. He puts his hands together and he freezes himself and Appa in a huge ball of ice.)

Katara (voice over): Aang! Aang, wake up! (He wakes up, gasping) It's okay. We're in the village now. Come on, get ready. Everyone's waiting to meet you.

(Aang gets up and puts on his shirt and hood. Katara looks at his airbender tattoos. She grabs Aang by the hand and drags him outside. He carries a staff with him.)

Aang: Whaaaa!

(Cut to a wide overhead shot as Katara pulls him out. A small crowd has gathered to greet him. It is composed of women of various ages and children.)

Katara: Aang, this is the entire village. Entire village, Aang.

(Aang bows to them in a friendly manner, but the people pull back from him anyway.)

Aang: Uh... why are they all looking at me like that? Did Appa sneeze on me?

(An old woman enters the frame as Aang inspects his clothes for bison snot.)

Gran Gran: Well, no one has seen an airbender in a hundred years. We thought they were extinct until my granddaughter and grandson found you.
Aang: 'Extinct'?
Katara: Aang, this is my grandmother.
Gran Gran: Call me Gran Gran.
Sokka (grabbing Aang's staff): What is this, a weapon? You can't stab anything with this.
Aang: It's not for stabbing. (He creates a jet of air that sucks the staff back into his hand.) It's for airbending.

(Aang opens the staff into a glider with red wings.)

Little Girl: Magic trick! Do it again!
Aang: Not magic, airbending. It lets me control the air currents around my glider and fly.
Sokka: You know, last time I checked, humans can't fly.
Aang: Check again!

(Aang launches himself into the air with his glider. He soars through the air, doing loops as the villagers on the ground point to him in wonder.)

Villagers: Whoa... it's flying... it's amazing!

(Aang looks down at Katara who smiles at him. He is so enthralled with her attention that slams right into Sokka's guard tower. He pulls his head out of the tower and falls to the ground with his glider.)

Aang (as he crashes): Oof!
Sokka (gasping): My watchtower!
Katara: That was amazing.

(She helps Aang back to his feet. He twirls his glider shut as Sokka examines the damaged tower behind him. After Aang closes the glider a huge bank of snow buries Sokka.)

Sokka: Great. You're an airbender, Katara's a waterbender, together you can just waste time all day long.
Aang: You're a waterbender!
Katara: Well... sort of. Not yet.
Gran Gran: All right. No more playing. Come on, Katara, you have chores.

(Gran Gran leads Katara away.)

Katara: I told you! He's the real thing, Gran Gran! I finally found a bender to teach me.
Gran Gran: Katara, try not to put all your hopes in this boy.
Katara: But he's special. I can tell. I sense he's filled with much wisdom.

(She looks over to her right. Cut to Aang with his tongue frozen to his staff, children gathered around him.)

Aang: (slurring) Sthee? Now my tongue ith thuck to my sthaff.

(A child next to him grabs the staff and yanks, but Aang's tongue stays stuck.)

Children (clapping): Tee hee!

(Fade to an afternoon or sunset shot of Zuko's ship cutting through the waves, then cut to Zuko facing two Fire Navy seamen. Iroh sits nearby.)

Iroh: Again.

(Zuko blasts fire from his hands at the guards, but misses. Then the guards attack Zuko with blasts of fire from their fists, but Zuko dodges. He back flips over the guards to land behind them.)

Zuko: Ha! Heeya!

(Iroh sighs and gets up.)

Iroh: No! Power in firebending comes from the breath. Not the muscles. The breath becomes energy in the body. The energy extends past your limbs and becomes fire. (Iroh demonstrates, releasing a controlling plume of flame that bursts in front of Zuko, but does not hit him) Get it right this time.
Zuko: Enough. I've been drilling this sequence all day. Teach me the next set. I'm more than ready.
Iroh: No, you are impatient. You have yet to master your basics. (More forcefully) Drill it again!
Zuko: Grrrr... huh! (He blasts one of the guards backwards with a gout of fire.) The sages tell us that the Avatar is the last airbender. He must be over a hundred years old by now. He's had a century to master the four elements. I'll need more than basic firebending to defeat him. You WILL teach me the advanced set!
Iroh: Very well. But first I must finish my roast duck. (Begins eating) Num num... num...

(Cut to a shot of the afternoon sky. The screen pans down to reveal Sokka, clearly addressing an audience as he paces back and forth.)

Sokka: Now men, it's important that you show no fear when you face a firebender. In the Water Tribe, we fight to the last man standing. For without courage, how can we call ourselves men?

(Cut to the audience. It is a group of six children, most of whom are toddlers.)

Little Boy (raising his hand): I gotta pee!
Sokka: Listen! Until your fathers return from the war, they're counting on you to be the men of this tribe. And that means no potty breaks.
Little Boy: But I really gotta go.
Sokka (sighing): Okay... who else has to go?

(All six raise their hands. Sokka slaps his forehead in disgust as all six exit to the right. Katara enters from the left.)

Katara: Have you seen Aang? Gran Gran said he disappeared over an hour ago.

(Cut to Aang emerging from a small igloo type bathroom stall. He adjusts his pants and smiles at the trip of boys coming to use the toilet.)

Aang (gesturing over his shoulder at the toilet): Wow! Everything freezes in there!
Children: Hahaha!
Sokka: Ugh! Katara, get him out of here. This lesson is for warriors only.
Kid (voice over): Wheeee!

(Cut to a rear shot of Appa, Aang on his back. They have propped up his tail using a makeshift sawhorse. A kid has used Appa's back and tail as a slide to land in a pile of snow. The children, and soon Katara, all start laughing.)

Sokka: Stop! Stop it right now! (To Aang) What's wrong with you? We don't have time for fun and games with a war going on.
Aang: What war? (He hops down off of Appa) What are you talking about?
Sokka: You're kidding, right?

(Aang's gaze shifts slightly off of Sokka to look at something beyond him o.c.)

Aang: PENGUIN!

(To accentuate Aang's exclamation the screen around him vibrates slightly in a visual effect. Cut to a shot of a penguin in distance, visible between Sokka and Katara. The camera closes on the penguin almost instantly. The penguin, aware that it has been spotted, makes an excited noise and turns to waddle away. Aang uses his airbending skill to run at unbelievable speed toward the horizon where the penguin had just been.)

Sokka: He's kidding, right?



Act III

(Fade to a beach loaded with penguins who waddle around squawking. Katara enters, looking for Aang.)

Katara: Aang?

(Cut to Aang chasing some penguins, but unable to catch them as the waddle away.)

Aang: Haha! Hey, come on little guy. Wanna go sledding?

(Aang lunges, but falls flat on his face. He gets back up as Katara approaches.)

Aang: Oof! Heh heh, I have a way with animals. (He puts his arms out and waddles in imitation of the four flippered penguins) Yarp! Yarp yarp! Yarp! Yarp yarp! Yarp!
Katara: (giggles) Hahaha... Aang, I'll help you catch a penguin if you teach me waterbending.
Aang: You got a deal! Just one little problem. I'm an airbender, not a waterbender. Isn't there someone in your tribe who can teach you?
Katara (looking away in sadness): No. You're looking at the only waterbender on the whole South Pole.
Aang: This isn't right. A waterbender needs to master water. What about the North Pole? There's another Water Tribe up there, right? Maybe they have waterbenders who could teach you.
Katara: Maybe. But we haven't had contact with our sister tribe in a long time. It's not exactly 'turn right at the second glacier.' It's on the other side of the world.
Aang: But you forget: I have a flying bison. Appa and I can personally fly you to the North Pole. Katara, we're gonna find you a master!
Katara (happily): That's... (then uncertain) I mean, I don't know. I've never left home before.
Aang: Well, you think about it. But in the meantime, can you teach me to catch one of these penguins?
Katara (mock teacherly tone): Okay, listen closely my young pupil. Catching penguins is an ancient and sacred art. Observe.

(She produces a little fish from her coat and tosses it at Aang. He is instantly surrounded by a horde of hungry penguins.

Fade to a shot of an ice bank. It appears to be late afternoon. Suddenly, Katara and Aang rocket off the ice bank, each sitting atop a penguin. The land on the bank below and continue down at high speed on the penguin's belly. Aang and his penguin take a jump off a small ramp, eventually landing in front of Katara. She takes the jump and lands near him. They laugh and whoop happily.)

Katara: I haven't done this since I was a kid!
Aang: You still are a kid!

(They continue to rocket across the frozen landscape, eventually entering system of ice tunnels. The tunnels are have periodic gaps where sunlight pours through. They emerge from the tunnels and get off their mounts, which stand up and dizzily wander away making little chirping noises. They walk forward, looking at something in front of them.)

Aang: Whoa... what is that?

(Cut to a huge ship locked in the ice in front of them. It is a derelict Fire Navy ship, silhouetted by the sun behind it.)

Katara (deathly serious): A Fire Navy ship, and a very bad memory for my people.

(Aang begins to walk to the ship.)

Katara: Aang, stop! We're not allowed to go near it. The ship could be booby trapped.
Aang: If you wanna be a bender, you have to let go of fear.

(She looks uncertain, then follows him to the ship. They climb up and enter the ship through a gaping hole in one of the forward compartments below the water line. They walk around the dark corridors inside past many a darkened room.)

Katara: This ship has haunted my tribe since Gran Gran was a little girl. It was part of the Fire Nation's first attacks.
Aang: Okay, back up. I have friends all over the world, even in the Fire Nation. I've never seen any war.
Katara: Aang, how long were you in that iceberg?
Aang: I don't know... a few days, maybe?
Katara: I think it was more like a hundred years!
Aang: What? That's impossible. Do I look like a hundred-twelve year old man to you?
Katara: Think about it. The war is a century old. You don't know about it because, somehow, you were in there that whole time. It's the only explanation.

(Aang puts his hand to his head and walks backward. Stunned by this realization, he sinks to the floor.)

Aang: A hundred years! I can't believe it.
Katara (kneeling next to him): I'm sorry, Aang. Maybe somehow there's a bright side to all this.
Aang: I did get to meet you.
Katara (smiles): Come on. Let's get out of here.

(She helps him back to his feet and they start walking once again. Fade to an exterior shot of the Fire Navy ship. Cut back to an interior shot of the ship as Aang enters a darkened room on the ship, Katara behind in the hallway.)

Katara: Aang? Let's head back. This place is creepy.
Aang: Huh?

(Cut to a shot of Aang's foot dragging a trip wire on the floor. Behind them the door is blocked by a grate that drops from the ceiling. They grab it just after it falls shut. They are trapped.)

Aang: What's that you said about booby traps?

(Around them, machinery in the room starts to operate. Gauges show steam pressure and wheels begin to turn. Steam begins to pour out of some of the equipment. Cut to an exterior shot of the ship. Suddenly, a bright flare explodes out of the Fire Navy ship and into the sky, leaving a trail of smoke behind it. Cut back to Aang and Katara looking out the window of the ship's bridge.)

Aang: Uh oh.

(Cut back to the flare as it rises. When it reaches its zenith it explodes with a small shower of sparks. Cut back to Aang and Katara with a wide shot on the bridge. There is a hole in the ceiling that Aang is looking at.)

Aang: Hold on tight!

(He grabs Katara, who cries out in surprise, and launches them both through the hole in the ceiling. He lands with her in his arms on top of the bridge.

Cut to a long shot of the falling flare as seen through the lens of a telescope. The telescope follows the flare down for a few moments, before shifting downwards to show Aang hopping down the ship and the ice which encases it to the ground below, Katara still in his arms.)

Zuko (voice over): The last airbender. (Cut to a profile view of Zuko looking through his telescope) Quite agile for his old age. Wake my uncle! Tell him I found the Avatar...

(Zuko looks back into his telescope to see Aang and Katara running across the ice away from the ship. He then scans left quickly, then pulls it back right to focus on Katara's village.)

Zuko: ...as well as his hiding place.

(Cut to a close up of Zuko's left eye, the scarred one, which arches in determination.)
[End Credits]
Act I

(The episode opens with a repeat shot of the flare set off by Aang in the prior episode falling from the sky. It is nearly sunset. The screen pans down to reveal a shot from behind Gran Gran and some other villagers. They look down the ice road out of their village to see Aang and Katara in the distance walking toward them. As they approach, the children run forward to greet them.)

Children: Yay! Aang's back!

(The children gather around Aang as Sokka comes forward angrily.)

Sokka (pointing at Aang): I knew it! You signaled the Fire Navy with that flare! You're leading them straight to us, aren't you?
Katara: Aang didn't do anything. It was an accident.
Aang: Yeh, we were on the ship and there was this booby trap and well... (putting his hand to his head as if trying to puzzle out the thought) ...we “boobied” right into it.
Gran Gran (shaking her head): Katara, you shouldn't have gone on that ship. Now we could all be in danger!
Aang: Don't blame Katara! I brought her there. (Looking downcast) It's my fault.
Sokka: Aha! The traitor confesses! Warriors, away from the enemy! (The children walk away from Aang and towards Sokka and Gran Gran.) The foreigner is banned from our village!
Katara (angrily): Sokka, you're making a mistake.
Sokka: No! I'm keeping my promise to Dad. I'm protecting you from threats like him!
Katara (motioning to Aang): Aang is not our enemy! Don't you see? Aang's brought us something we haven't had in a long time. Fun.
Sokka: Fun? We can't fight firebenders with fun!
Aang (smiling earnestly): You should try it sometime.
Sokka: Get out of our village. Now!
Katara: Grandmother, please, don't let Sokka do this.
Gran Gran: Katara, you knew going on that ship was forbidden. Sokka is right. I think it best if the airbender leaves.
Katara: Then I'm banished too!

(She turns, taking Aang by the shoulder, and begins to walk off.)

Katara: C'mon, Aang, let's go!

(Cut to a wide, profile shot of the scene. Appa is on the left, ready for flight, Sokka and the villagers on the right. In between are Katara and Aang walking to Appa, the sun starting to set behind them.)

Sokka (pointing at Katara): Where do you think you're going?
Katara: To find a waterbender! Aang is taking me to the North Pole!
Aang (momentarily confused, then brightening): I am? Great!
Sokka: Katara! (She stops) Would you really choose him over your tribe? Your own family?

(She pauses, doubt and indecision on her face. Aang comes up next to her.)

Aang: Katara, I don't want to come between you and your family.

(He walks forward and o.c. towards Appa.)

Katara: So, you're leaving the South Pole? This is goodbye?
Aang: Thanks for penguin sledding with me.
Katara: Where will you go?
Aang (putting a hand on Appa): Guess I'll go back home and look for the airbenders. (Thinking) Wow, I haven't cleaned my room in a hundred years. Not looking forward to that.

(He airbends himself onto Appa's head where he takes the reigns. He turns to address the village.)

Aang: It was nice meeting everyone.
Sokka: Let's see your bison fly now, air boy.
Aang: Come on, Appa, you can do it! Yip! Yip!

(Appa rumbles and gets onto his feet.)

Sokka: Yeh, I thought so.

(Just then a little girl with pig tails rushes forward with a cry to stand by Katara.)

Little Girl (her eyes shining with tears): Aang! Don't go! We'll miss you!
Aang (sadly): I'll miss you too.

(He turns to look at Katara, then cut to a close of Katara, her braids blowing in the breeze. Cut back to Aang who turns away, shaking the reigns once more.)

Aang: Come on, boy.

(Appa begins to walk off in the background, Katara and the little girl, backs to the camera, in the foreground. The little girls runs off crying back to the village while Gran Gran comes up behind Katara.)

Gran Gran: Katara, you'll feel better after you –
Katara (cutting her off angrily): You happy now? There goes my one chance of becoming a waterbender!

(She too stalks off angrily, leaving Gran Gran alone.

Cut to a shot of Sokka directing the little boys through the village gate. Martial music plays in the background.)

Sokka: All right! Ready our defenses! The Fire Nation could be on our shores any moment now!

(A little boy stops, raising his head and dancing about suggestively.)

Little Boy: But, I gotta –
Sokka (cutting him off forcefully and pointing to the fortifications): And no potty breaks!

(Fade to a shot of the frozen wasteland outside the village. The camera pans right to reveal Appa and Aang resting in the curves of some ice formations. The formation has two doughnut shaped holes. Appa lies on his back in the lower one, Aang in the smaller higher one. Appa rumbles.)

Aang: Yeh, I liked her too.

(Aang looks out to see and gets up with a start. Cut to his p.o.v. which shows a Fire Navy ship steaming toward the village. The camera zooms backward to show the back of Aang's head. He looks over from the ship to where the village lies over the horizon.)

Aang: The village! (He slides down off his perch) Appa, wait here!

(Appa rumbles in reply and shifts his position slightly. Cut to Sokka putting on his war garb. Fingerless gloves, arm wraps, boots and face paint are all applied silently.

Cut to a quick exterior shot of Zuko's ship steaming ahead, then cut again to a parallel shot of Zuko being helped into his armor by some attendants. He girds himself with a breastplate, shoulder guard and helmet.

The scene shifts to Sokka leaving his tent with his weapons, then cut to a silent overhead pan shot of the village. Alone, Sokka stands atop the ice wall of the village, scanning the mist for any sign of the enemy. Suddenly, a deep rumbling noise is heard and the ground begins to shake. Parts of the wall on which Sokka stands begins to crumble. The villagers look around in alarm. Cut back to Sokka where the guard tower in the background collapses in a heap of snow and ice.)

Sokka (disappointed at the tower's collapse): Oh man!

(Pandemonium breaks out in the village as people being to run every which way. Katara is in their midst, but stops, seeing something in the mist. Cut to a shot from Katara's p.o.v. Still atop the wall, Sokka looks small. Suddenly a massive shadow emerges from the mist, dwarfing Sokka. It is the bow of Prince Zuko's ship.

Cut to a zoom in close up of Sokka.)

Sokka: Ohhh, man!

(The shot shifts to a profile view of the village and the encroaching ship. Prince Zuko's vessel has cut through the ice all the way to the city wall itself. As the ships continue to ice break towards the wall, Katara puts Gran Gran into one of the tents in the rear and then gets a little child out of harm's way as the ice floor of the village begins to crack all over the place under the stress.

As she puts the child in a tent, she turns to look back to Sokka. Cut to a wide overhead shot of the ship reaching the wall, Sokka poised both tragically and comically to the ships hull with his weapon.)

Katara: Sokka, get out of the way!

(As the ship reaches the wall, it collapses into a heap of ice and snow which tumbles back into the village, carrying Sokka with it. Cut to a wide shot of the ship which has come to a halt. Steam wafts up from where the bow has split the ice. The villagers, Katara in front, have emerged from their shelters and stare in trepidation and amazement at the ship. Katara draws a deep breath in anticipation. Cut to Sokka looking up at the ship, who also draws breath.

Cut to a wide shot from behind Sokka that pans up. With a noise of metal on metal the bowsprit of the ship opens and folds out and down onto the village's floor. The bowsprit has become a huge gangplank, similar to the Roman corvus, for disembarking Fire Nation troops. Sokka's falls backwards to avoid being crushed by the bowsprit.

As the steam clears from the top of the bowsprit, Zuko and a host of Fire Nation soldiers are revealed. A quick cut to Sokka and the villagers is replaced by one of Zuko walking down the gangplank stairs followed by guards.

Cut back to Sokka, who gets up and charges Zuko with an adolescent war cry. As he runs up the steps to the Prince, Zuko casually and expertly kicks his weapon out of his hand and then kicks him in the face, sending him sprawling on the ice to the planks right. His head gets stuck in the snow and he struggles comically to free himself. The villagers draw back in fright and the ease with which their only warrior has been dispatched by the invaders. Cut to an overhead shot of the villagers and Fire Nation soldiers who have now reached them. Zuko walks forward to address the village. He looks over the crowd, then walks over to Katara and Gran Gran.)

Zuko: Where are you hiding him?

(He looks around the crowd as there is no immediate response. He grabs Gran Gran and shows her to the villagers.)

Zuko: He'd be about this age? Master of all elements?

(Again no one responds. After a brief pause, he throws Gran Gran roughly back to Katara. With a cry of frustration he launches a gout of flame over the villager's heads. The cower in fear.)

Zuko: I know you're hiding him!

(Behind Zuko, Sokka gets up, his face paint largely gone. He retrieves his weapon and charges Zuko with another cry. Cut to Sokka's p.o.v., where Zuko turns to him in annoyance. He dodges Sokka's charges and flips him over his head. Zuko fires a blast of flame at Sokka, but Sokka rolls out of the way, throwing his boomerang at Zuko as he does. Caught by surprise, Zuko barely avoids the boomerang. He turns to look back in anger at Sokka over the near miss. Cut back to Sokka, the villagers behind him. A little boy in the crowd throws him a spear.)

Little Boy: Show no fear!

(Sokka catches the spear and charges Zuko, who, as Sokka reaches him, breaks off pieces of the spear shaft with his wrist guards. After the head of the spear has been shorn off, Zuko grabs the spear, boinks Sokka on the forehead with it several times, then breaks it in half and drops the pieces on the ground. Sokka, after getting bonked on the head, has also sunk to the ground, rubbing his head. A "down the tubes" sound effect plays for a comic effect. Cut to a shot from Sokka's p.o.v., with Zuko standing sternly over him. In the sky in the background the boomerang reappears. It slams Zuko in the back of the head, knocking his helmet off kilter. Furious, Zuko begins to spit fire out of his hands as he hovers menacingly over Sokka.

Cut to Aang skyrocketing towards the village on a penguin, staff in hand. He flies right under Zuko, sweeping his legs out from under him. Zuko lands butt up. The helmet lands on his behind in a most suggestive manner. The children cheer as Aang reaches the villagers. As he and the penguin bank, they dump a lot of snow on the cheering kids. They stop cheering for a moment, but then take up the cheer again anyway. The penguin slides to a halt and it pushes Aang off. The penguin gets up, looks at Aang, and then turns and waddles away.)

Aang: Hey Katara. Hey Sokka.
Sokka (dryly): Hi...Aang. Thanks for comin'.

(Aang looks over at the Firebenders. Cut to Zuko getting to his feet and assuming a firebending stance, then cut to an overhead shot of Aang at the ready with his staff, surrounded by Zuko and his men. They begin to close in, but Aang blows the men on either side of him backwards with blasts of air. He blasts Zuko as well, but he holds his ground, shielding his face from the wind.)

Aang: Looking for me?
Zuko (incredulous): You're the airbender? You're the Avatar?
Katara: Aang?
Sokka: No way.

(Cut to an overhead shot showing Zuko and Aang maneuvering for position against each other in the middle of a village that has become an arena.)

Zuko: I've spent years preparing for this encounter. Training. Meditating. You're just a child!
Aang: Well, you're just a teenager.

(Zuko fires blast after blast. Aang cries out. He is hard pressed, fear showing on his face. Aang dissipates each blast as it strikes by twirling his staff in front of him like a helicopter blade. The dissipation doesn't block the fire from reaching the villagers, though, and they cry out. Aang looks behind to them and realizes he can't protect them all.)

Aang: If I go with you, will you promise to leave everyone alone?

(Cut to wide shot of Zuko still in a firebending stance. After a brief pauses he straightens up and nods stiffly. Cut back to Aang, a soldier's hands entering the frame to take his staff and lead him to the ship. Cut to a shot of the villagers where Katara rushes forward.)

Katara: No, Aang! Don't do this!
Aang: Don't worry, Katara, it'll be okay. (They push him forward roughly) Take care of Appa for me until I get back.
Zuko: Head a course to the Fire Nation. I'm going home.

(They board the ship and the bowsprit rises back up. Aang looks back hopefully at his new friend as the ship closes. Katara's eyes water as the prison closes around Aang. His smile drops as he sees her pain. The shadow of the closing bowsprit closes over him, then cut to commercial break and the bowsprit snaps into place.)



Act II

(The show returns with an overhead shot of the village. It is morning. The jagged path through the ice that Zuko's ship opened is plainly visible as is the shattered village wall. Life goes on, however, the fire at the center of the village smokes and villager are visible about their work. Several shots flip by of villagers tending the fire, digging out the watchtower and re-raising tents. They look sad. Cut to a long shot of Katara at the water's edge looking out at the sun rising over the sea, then cut to a frontal view of her. Sokka walks by in the background carrying some things.)

Katara: We have to go after that ship, Sokka. Aang saved our tribe; now we have to save him.
Sokka: Katara, I—
Katara: Why can't you realize that he's on our side? If we don't help him, no one will. I know you don't like Aang, but we owe him and I—
Sokka: Katara! Are you gonna talk all day or are you comin' with me?

(Sokka motions to his left and the screen expands to show a canoe ready to go.)

Katara (with a happy gasp): Sokka!

(She gives him a bear hug.)

Sokka: Get in. We're going to save your boyfriend.
Katara: He's not my—
Sokka: Whatever.
Gran Gran (entering the shot from behind them): What do you two think you're doing?

(They turn and try to look innocent. Cut to Gran Gran, who looks momentarily severe, but then smiles and offers them a blue bundle.)

Gran Gran: You'll need these. You have a long journey ahead of you. It's been so long since I've had hope. But you brought it back to life, my little waterbender. (She hugs Katara) And you, my brave warrior, be nice to your sister.

(She hugs Sokka.)

Sokka: Yeah... okay, Gran.
Gran Gran: Aang is the Avatar. He's the world's only chance. You both found him for a reason. Now your destinies are intertwined with his.
Katara (turning to the canoe): There's no way we're gonna catch a war ship with a canoe.

(The shot expands to show Appa mounting the crest of hill in the background. He emits a low rumble as he approaches.)

Katara: Appa!

(She runs o.c. towards Appa.)

Sokka: You just love taking me out of my comfort zone, don't ya?

(Fade to a shot of Zuko's ship's prow cutting through the ice packed water. Cut to the foredeck. Aang, hands bound behind him, faces Zuko, Iroh and a bunch of guards.)

Zuko: This staff will make an excellent gift for my father. I suppose you wouldn't know of fathers, being raised by monks. Take the Avatar to the prison hold. And (shoving the staff in Iroh's direction) take this to my quarters.

(Iroh takes the staff as Zuko walks away. Iroh immediately turns to the guard on his left.)

Iroh: Hey, you mind taking this to his quarters for me?

(The guard takes the staff as Aang is escorted down some stairs into the ship. A quick shot of the ship steaming through a narrow strip of water between walls of ice is replaced by another of Aang being escorted along one of the ship's hallways.)

Aang: So... I guess you never fought an airbender before. I bet I can take you both with my hands tied behind my back.
Guard 1: Silence!

(They stop in front of a door. As one of the guards moves to open the door with a key, Aang draws a great breath and blows the guard with the key into the door, knocking him out. The breath also propels him backwards and into the guard behind him. They are blown all the way back down the hallway. They crash into the stairs they came down on. The guard is knocked out since Aang used him to cushion his own impact. Aang then airbends himself back up onto the deck and airbends the door at the end of the deck open. He enters the ship and runs down the hall. Cut to an overhead shot from the bridge looking down onto the foredeck. One of the guards Aang just escaped from emerges and shouts up to a guard on the bridge deck in the foreground. The bridge guards turns and runs o.c.)

Guard 2: The Avatar has escaped!

(Cut to an overhead shot of Appa swimming through the water, with Katara at the reigns and Sokka on his back in the saddle.)

Sokka (drearily): Go. Fly. Soar.
Katara: Please, Appa, we need your help. Aang needs your help.
Sokka: Up. Ascend. Elevate.
Katara: Sokka doesn't believe you can fly, but I do, Appa. (Coaxingly) Come on. Don't you wanna save Aang?

(Appa rumbles in response, but doesn't speed up or fly.)

Sokka: What was it that kid said? Yee-ha? Hup hup? Wahoo? Uh... yip yip?

(This last gets a response. Appa rumbles again and begins to flop his massive beaver tail. He begins to hop along the surface of the water as he picks up speed. Finally, with a mighty heave, he takes off into the sky.)

Katara (ecstatic): You did it, Sokka!
Sokka: He's flying! He's flying! Katara, he's—! (Katara gives him a smug look. Then, nonchalantly) I mean, big deal, he's flying.

(Cut to a stationary shot as Appa flies by at high and into the horizon, then cut to Aang running down one of the ship's hallway, looking behind him for pursuers. His hands are still bound behind him. He turns and starts to run forward – right into three Fire Nation soldiers blocking his way, weapons drawn.)

Aang (panting): You haven't seen my staff around, have you?

(Aang runs forward and up and around the guards by running along the walls and ceiling in corkscrew circles. He gets by them with ease and look at his retreating form with surprise.)

Aang: Thanks anyway!

(He runs into another hallway, this time blocked by a single guard. He blasts a fireball at him, but he avoids it by launching himself over the guards head. The frame rate slows as Aang passes, showing how Aang is able to cut his wrist bonds by catching them on the horn of the guard's helmet. The bonds break and the guard is thrown off balance and onto the ground. Aang, his hands now free, runs o.c. Several shots of Aang opening random doors goes by. The last door he opens reveals a snoring Iroh.)

Aang (whispering): Sorry...

(Sight gag: His lips linger behind the rest of his head to say it while he closes the door. He then runs by another open door, stops and turns back to it.)

Aang: My staff!

(He enters and the door shuts behind him. Cut to an interior shot of the room where it is clear that Zuko was hiding in wait for the Avatar.)

Zuko: Looks like I underestimated you.

(After a brief pause, Zuko begins blasting fire at Aang, who barely dodges. He is terrified and he gasps and pants to catch his breath. After dodging a few more shots, Aang rolls underneath Zuko to get behind him. By staying behind him, Zuko is unable to blast him with fire. Cut to an exterior shot of the upper decks of the ship. The long window of the room where Aang and Zuko are fighting lights up every other second each time Zuko releases a blast. Cut back to the fight, where Aang now faces Zuko. He dissipates each fireball with a small air ball he forms with his hands. Aang creates an air scooter and rides around the walls and ceiling of the room, all the time getting licked by the gouts of flame Zuko unleashes at him. Aang terminates the airball and grabs a tapestry off the wall. He wraps Zuko up in it as he passes. While Zuko struggles against the tapestry, Aang is able to grab his staff. Zuko breaks his bonds and they once again square off against each other. After a few seconds of maneuvering, Aang airbends a mattress up off the floor and slams it into Zuko. The mattress propels Zuko into the opposite wall. He is smashed into it and he falls to the ground, onto the mattress. Aang then airbends the mattress up to the Zuko, smashing Zuko into that. Both fall back down to the ground. Zuko looks up in anger to find Aang gone.

Cut to the bridge, where a the wheel mechanism that opens a deck hatch on the floor begins to spin. The hatch opens and Aang airbends himself on to the bridge from below. Aang rushes forward out on to the bridge's observation deck. He opens his glider, throws it into the air and jumps after it. He catches it, a happy expression on his face. Unfortunately, behind him, Zuko has jumped after him in pursuit. With a fierce cry of desperation, he grabs Aang's foot. Both get up and square off yet again. Aang's look of trepidation is tempered as he turns over his left shoulder to see Appa up in the sky gaining on Zuko's ship.)

Zuko: What is that?

(Cut briefly to a shot from behind Katara and Sokka as they close in on the ship.)

Aang: Appa!

(Aang turns just in time to use his staff to block a fire blast from Zuko. He uses his staff as a helicopter to escape the blasts and comes back down on the edge of the deck, almost falling overboard. He regains his balance and blow three more fireballs before his staff is knocked away from him. He dodges a few more blasts before he is finally knocked overboard. Aang falls into the water below.)

Katara (hysterical): Aang! No!

(Cut to an underwater shot as Aang sinks.)

Katara (voice-over as Aang sinks): Aang! Aang! AANG!

(At Katara's final scream, Aang's eyes and tattoo's glow white, an expression of determination forming on his face. He turns around in the water and begins to rise towards the surface. Around him, a mighty whirlpool of water begins to form. Cut to a wider underwater shot. Aang, at the center of a now monstrous, inverted tornado of water is propelled toward the surface at amazing speed. He breaks the surface in front of the ship, towering high over the bridge atop his swirling maelstrom of water. Cut to Zuko, who looks up at the swirling column of water and the Avatar at its pinnacle with dismay and fear. Aang lands on the deck, his eyes still aglow, and bends the water from the column around him in circle. He releases it and it expands outward in a shockwave that blasts Zuko and his men overboard. Cut to Sokka and Katara witnessing the scene from Appa's back above.)

Katara (incredulously): Did you see what he just did?
Sokka: Now that was some waterbending!

(Cut to Aang on the foredeck. He is on his knees, wobbling after the huge energy expenditure. He falls forward, the white energy fading from his eyes and tattoos. Appa lands and Katara and Sokka jump off to retrieve him.)

Katara (worried): Aang! Are you okay?

(Cut to Katara kneeling and holding Aang, Sokka beside her.)

Aang (drained): Hey Katara. Hey Sokka. Thanks for coming.
Sokka: Well, I couldn't let you have all the glory.
Aang: I dropped my staff.
Sokka: Got it!

(Sokka runs over to pick up the staff. As he picks it up, Sokka is shocked to see that Zuko holds the other end of it. Zuko was washed overboard, but held onto the part of Aang's staff that was hanging out over the deck. Sokka butts Zuko in the head with the staff three times to the same “doink doink doink” sound effects that were heard when Zuko did the same to Sokka earlier. Zuko lets go and begins to fall to the water below, but grabs the anchor chain in time. He hangs by one hand.)

Sokka: Ha! That's from the Water Tribe!

(Cut to a wide shot of Appa, Aang and Katara. Appa gets up, shaking off some water. Cut to some of the guards who had been washed way down the deck by Aang's waterbending. They get up, preparing for combat. Katara picks up a stream of water from the deck and the guards pull back slightly in fear. She tries to whip the guards with the water, but instead freezes the water on the deck, including the water around Sokka's feet in the background.)

Sokka: Katara!

(Sokka starts to chip away at the ice holding his feet with his boomerang while the soldiers move forward once again. Katara picks up another stream of water and throws it at the soldiers without looking. The camera then expands to show that they are now frozen in a thin sheet of ice. She turns and climbs back up on Appa.)

Katara: Hurry up, Sokka!
Sokka (to himself): I'm just a guy with a boomerang; I didn't ask for all this flying and magic.

(He finally frees himself and runs up Appa's tail.)

Sokka: Yip yip! Yip yip!

(Once he is onboard, Appa rumbles and takes off. Cut to Iroh who has just emerged onto the deck after his nap, looking up to the sky.)

Iroh (rubbing his eyes): Huh?

(Cut to Appa rapidly flying away from the ship, then to Iroh helping Zuko back up onto the ship.)

Zuko: Shoot them down!

(As Appa gains altitude, Zuko and Iroh in unison launch a massive bolt of fire at Appa. Katara and Sokka look behind them in horror at the approaching fireball. Aang jumps to the back of the saddle and, using his staff like a baseball bat, airbends a gale that sends the fireball at a right angle away from Appa and into the ice cliff nearby. The fireball explodes, releasing a huge amount of ice from the cliff wall which falls into the narrow channel that Zuko's ship is navigating. Zuko gasps in horror as the bow of the ship and indeed the entire channel is blocked up under an avalanche of ice. Cut to Aang, Katara and Sokka laughing as they fly away. Cut back to Iroh and Zuko on the foredeck of the heavily damaged ship.)

Iroh: Good news for the Fire Lord. The nation's greatest threat is just a little kid.
Zuko: That kid, Uncle, just did this. (Shot widens to show the prow buried in ice) I won't underestimate him again. Dig this ship out and follow them! (In the background, some soldiers are using controlled firebending to thaw out their compatriots frozen by Katara) As soon as you're done with that.

(Cut to a close up of Zuko's eyes that fades to a long shot, sunset scene of Appa flying through the clouds. Then cut to a closer, profile shot of Appa and the kids flying through the clouds.)

Katara: How did you do that? With the water? It was the most amazing thing I've ever seen.
Aang (sitting cross legged on the bridge of the saddle, a slightly sad expression on his face): I don't know. I just sort of... did it.
Katara: Why didn't you tell us you were the Avatar?
Aang: Because... I never wanted to be.

(Overhead, a cloud passes over them, momentarily blocking the fading sunlight. After it passes, they enter a shaft of sunlight.)

Katara: But Aang, the world's been waiting for the Avatar to return and finally put an end to this war.
Aang (looking down sadly): And how am I going to do that?
Katara: According to legend, you need to first master water, then earth, then fire, right?
Aang: That's what the monks told me.
Katara: Well, if we go to the North Pole you can master waterbending.
Aang (now smiling): We can learn it together!
Katara: And Sokka, I'm sure you'll get to knock some firebender heads on the way.
Sokka (somewhat dreamily): I'd like that. I'd really like that.
Katara: Then we're in this together.
Aang (producing a scroll): All right, but before I learn waterbending, we have some serious business to attend to (he airbends himself over to them and opens the scroll to reveal a map) here, here, and here.

(He points to two spots in the Earth Kingdom, and one spot on the southern Air Nomad islands in quick succession.)

Katara: What's there?
Aang: Here (pointing to the eastern Earth Kingdom) we'll ride the hopping llamas. Then waaaay over here (pointing to a spot on the southern Air Nomad islands) we'll surf on the backs of giant koi fish. Then back over here we'll ride the hog-monkeys. They don't like people riding them, but that's what makes it fun!

(Cut to a long shot of Appa flying through the clouds at sunset, shafts of the suns fading light breaking through the clouds, then fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Scene opens with a view of the sun rising over a lake. The camera pans left to where Appa and the group are on the lake shore. One of the members is apparently asleep in a Water Tribe sleeping bag on the ground. Appa is standing, grazing slowly, while a small fire casts a plume of smoke. Switch to a close of up of Appa with Aang facing the camera, sitting in Appa's "driver's seat." Katara is up in the passenger section doing some kind of work.)

Aang: (while adjusting Appa's reins) Wait 'til you see it, Katara. The Air Temple is one of the most beautiful places in the world.
Katara: (cautious) Aang, I know you're excited, but it's been a hundred years since you've been home.
Aang: That's why I'm so excited!
Katara: It's just that a lot can change in all that time.
Aang: I know, but I need to see it for myself.

(Aang floats down from Appa's back and walks over to Sokka, who is snoring peacefully in his sleeping bag on the ground.)

Aang: Wake up, Sokka! Air Temple here we come!

(Sokka awakens, making groggy noises.)

Sokka: Sleep now... temple later...

(He rolls over and begins to snore again. Camera switches back to Aang; his eyes blink accompanied by an audio effect. He is clearly not pleased. A mischievous grin spreads over his face as he gets an idea. Aang picks up a stick as Katara watches from atop Appa's back.)

Aang: Sokka! Wake up! (He begins to run the stick up and down Sokka's sleeping bag.) There's a prickle snake in your sleeping bag!
Sokka: (startled) Aaahhh! Get it off! Get it off! Aaahhh!

(Sokka hops around in his sleeping bag until he loses his balance and falls flat on his face. Katara laughs at him. Sokka looks very irritated.)

Aang: (pokes his head out from behind Sokka.) Great! You're awake. Let's go.

(Scene fades to a view of a Fire Nation naval yard. Tents and buildings line the right side of the screen, ships line the left and what looks like a railroad line runs down the middle. The screen pans left, eventually resting on Zuko's damaged ship. It is much smaller than the other Fire Nation ships. The prow of Zuko's ship has been opened, its spout lying on the floor of the navy yard. Two figures have walked down the spout and are entering the naval yard itself. Switch to a close up of Zuko and Iroh as they walk into the yard.)

Zuko: Uncle, I want the repairs made as quickly as possible. I don't want to stay too long and risk losing his trail.
Iroh: You mean the Avatar?
Zuko: (turning on his uncle angrily) Don't mention his name on these docks! Once word gets out that he's alive every firebender will be out looking for him and I don't want anyone getting in the way.
Zhao: (from offscreen) Getting in the way of what, Prince Zuko?

(Zuko and Iroh turn to face the camera with somewhat surprised expressions. Cut to Zhao as he approaches them, still speaking. Pan out to show the meeting of the three; Zhao's hands are clasped behind his back authoritatively.)

Zuko: (with distaste) Captain Zhao.
Zhao: It's Commander now. And General Iroh-- (he bows to Iroh) --great hero of our nation.
Iroh: Retired general.
Zhao: The Fire Lord's brother and son are welcome guests any time. What brings you to my harbor?
Iroh: Our ship is being repaired.

(The screen expands as Iroh gestures at the heavily damaged bow of Zuko's ship.)

Zhao: That's quite a bit of damage.
Zuko: Yes... you wouldn't believe what happened. (He gives his uncle a sideways glance and immediately passes the buck.) Uncle! Tell Commander Zhao what happened.

(Iroh's eyes go wide and an audio effect is heard as he blinks in response to the burden Zuko has just placed on him.)

Iroh: Yes, I will do that. It was incredible. (Leans over and whispers to Zuko.) What... did we crash or something?
Zuko: (uncomfortable) Uh, yes! Right into an Earth Kingdom ship.
Zhao: Really? You must regale me with all the thrilling details. (He smiles and puts his face right up to Zuko's in an obvious challenge.) Join me for a drink?
Zuko: Sorry, but we have to go.

(Zuko turns to leave, but Iroh places a hand on his shoulder and stops him.)

Iroh: Prince Zuko, show Commander Zhao your respect. (Turning to Zhao.) We would be honored to join you. Do you have any ginseng tea? It's my favorite.

(Zuko growls in frustration and releases fire from his fists angrily as he turns to follow Zhao and Iroh down the dock.)

(Switch to view of Appa's back, Aang and Katara up front, Sokka in the passenger saddle. The camera pans in on Sokka slowly and then switches to a close up of Sokka's stomach, which growls.)

Sokka: (annoyed) Hey, stomach, be quiet, all right? I'm trying to find us some food.

(He searches the food bag and dumps it out onto his glove. Only a few crumbs come out.)

Sokka: Hey! Who ate all my blubbered seal jerky?
Aang: Oh, that was food? I used it to start the campfire last night. Sorry.
Sokka: (incredulous) You WHAT? Awww, no wonder the flames smelled so good.

(Pan shot of Appa swooping towards the now much closer mountains, followed by another close up of Aang and the group.)

Aang: The Batola mountain range! We're almost there!
Katara: (uneasy) Aang? Before we get to the temple, I want to talk to you about the airbenders.
Aang: What about 'em?
Katara: (close-up of Katara's face.) Well, I just want you to be prepared for what you might see. The Fire Nation is ruthless. They killed my mother and they could have done the same to your people.
Aang: (close-up of Aang's face, which relaxes into hopeful optimism) Just because no one has seen an airbender doesn't mean the Fire Nation killed them all. (Cut to a front view of both, sitting up front.) They probably escaped.
Katara: I know it's hard to accept.
Aang: You don't understand, Katara. The only way to get to an airbender temple is on a flying bison, and I doubt the Fire Nation has any flying bison. Right, Appa?

(Aang rubs the big animal's head. Screen cuts to show a full view of Appa, who grunts an affirmative.)

Aang: (voice-over) Yip yip!

(Appa flies them up higher, turning tightly around a mountain face. Katara and Sokka are straining against the wind sheer the faster they move. Appa flies up and over a rocky outcropping and treetops to reveal the tall spires of the Southern Air Temple behind it.)

Aang: There it is... the Southern Air Temple.
Katara: Aang, it's amazing!
Aang: (to Appa) We're home, buddy. We're home.

(Scene cuts back to the Fire Nation navy yard. The shot pans right away from the ships, revealing a wooden stockade and many Fire Nation tents behind it. One is particularly large, with a prominent Fire Nation symbol on it. Two guards, flanked by large standing firepots, stand at the ready in front of this tent. The scene cuts again to the interior of the large tent where Commander Zhao stands with his back to the camera, inspecting a large map of the world upon the wall.)

Zhao: (panning back from him slowly.) And by year's end, the Earth Kingdom capital will be under our rule.

(Camera cuts to a view of the entire room. Iroh is inspecting a stand of weapons on the left and Zuko sits in one of two chairs in front of Zhao. Zhao turns to Zuko.)

Zhao: The Fire Lord will finally claim victory in this war.
Zuko: (Cut to Zuko's upper body.) If my father thinks the rest of the world will follow him willingly, then he is a fool.

(Zhao sits in the chair next to Zuko.)

Zhao: Two years at sea have done little to temper your tongue. (pause) So, how is your search for the Avatar going?

(Iroh tips over the stand of weapons he has been examining in the background. The commotion brings the conversation to a halt. Iroh cringes at the mess he has just made.)

Iroh: (embarrassed) My fault entirely.

(He sheepishly backs o.c. to the left. Zhao watches him move off.)

Zuko: (cut to Zuko.) We haven't found him yet.
Zhao: (cut to Zhao.) Did you really expect to? The Avatar died a hundred years ago-- (cut back to Zuko.) --along with the rest of the airbenders.

Zuko averts his eyes guiltily. Cut back to Zhao's eager face.)

Zhao: Unless you found some evidence that the Avatar is alive.
Zuko: (still looking away) No. Nothing.
Zhao: (rising from his chair) Prince Zuko, the Avatar is the only one who can stop the Fire Nation from winning this war. (cut to front view of both.) If you have an ounce-- (he leans his face into Zuko's) --of loyalty left, you'll tell me what you've found.
Zuko: (defiantly) I haven't found anything. It's like you said. The Avatar probably died a long time ago. Come on, Uncle, we're going.

(Zuko gets up and tries to exit, but he is blocked by the guards as they cross their spears in front of him. Another guard approaches Zhao to deliver his report.)

Guard: Commander Zhao, we interrogated the crew as you instructed. They confirmed Prince Zuko had the Avatar in custody, but let him escape.
Zhao: Now, remind me...

(Cut to Zuko still blocked by the guards. Zhao comes up behind him.)

Zhao: ... how exactly was your ship damaged?

(Zuko looks down in defeat.)

(Cut to a brief scenic shot of the temple. It is quickly replaced by a long shot of Appa standing on what looks like a landing platform with a path leading up. The screen pans up hundreds of feet winding path curving back and forth across the rock face of the temple's mountain. Three little figures can be seen walking up toward the temple. One of these is racing ahead of the others. Cut to a close shot of the three; Aang is the one ahead and he races off screen as Katara and Sokka round the bend.)

Sokka: So where do I get something to eat?

(Cut again to a close up of the two siblings. Sokka has a very cross look on his face and he's clutching his stomach to illustrate his hunger.)

Katara: You're lucky enough to be one of the first outsiders to ever visit an airbender temple and all you can think about is food? (Camera cuts to follow them from above and behind.)
Sokka: I'm just a simple guy with simple needs.

(Cut again to show Aang at the edge of the path where he has stopped to let the others catch up. They do, and he points below them.)

Aang: So that's where my friends and I would play airball!

(Aang gestures at a small parapet cut into the rock face below the path. It is populated with a thicket of densely packed sticks of varying heights that have been stuck in the ground. A goal with a backboard occupies either end of the field.)

Aang: And... over there would be where the bison would sleep... and...

(His voice trails off. He sighs.)

Katara: What's wrong?
Aang: This place used to be full of monks and lemurs and bison. Now there's just a bunch of weeds.

(Close up of Aang. He looks sad. Cuts immediately to show Aang from behind as the camera pans back to bring Katara and Sokka into view.)

Aang: I can't believe how much things have changed.

(Sokka and Katara look at each, then change the subject, hurrying up to him.)

Sokka: So, uh, this airball game? How do you play?

(Aang smiles.)

(Scene changes to Sokka with a backboard behind him, looking ready for action. Cut to Aang with the opposite backboard behind him. He is bending air around a rapidly spinning ball to keep it floating above his outstretched right hand. Suddenly, Aang starts manipulating the ball like a Harlem Globetrotter. Then, he throws it up in the air over his head. Sokka follows it with his eyes. Aang puts his hands behind his back, closes his eyes and smiles, waiting for the ball to come back down. He cracks one eye open and bends the air at the precise moment to send the ball bouncing through the field of sticks like a pinball in an arcade game. The POV switches to Sokka, who watches the ball ricochet toward him at amazing speed. The ball hits him in the stomach and he is propelled backward through a rotating door in the backboard behind him. He hits the ground nearby.)

Aang: Hahaha! Aang seven, Sokka zero!

(He shows the score with his hands, seven fingers for him and a zero between his touching fingertips for Sokka.)

Sokka: (getting up painfully) Making him feel better is putting me in a world of hurt.

(Sokka sees something that makes him stop and move forward. It is a Fire soldier helmet lying on the ground. Sokka crawls over to it.)

Sokka: Katara, check this out.
Katara: (seeing the helmet, accusingly) Fire Nation.
Sokka: We should tell him.
Katara: (turning to call to Aang) Aang, there's something you need to see.
Aang: (approaching happily with the ball) Okay!

(Katara looks back and forth between the helmet and the happy boy rapidly approaching, unsure whether to show him the horrible discovery. Making her choice, she waterbends the snow on the nearby bank down onto both the helmet and Sokka.)

Aang: What is it?
Katara: (uncertainly) Uh... just a new waterbending move I learned.
Aang: Nice one. But enough practicing. We have a whole temple to see!

(He walks o.c. Cut back to Katara and Sokka, who stands and wipes the snow off his shoulders and head.)

Sokka: You know, you can't protect him forever.



Act II

(The scene has changed to the entrance gate of the Air Temple itself. Aang runs in alone, leaving Sokka and Katara a moment to speak alone.)

Sokka: Katara, firebenders were here. You can't pretend they weren't.
Katara: (walking away from him) I can for Aang's sake.

(Sokka comes up behind her and they walk forward together.)

Katara: If he finds out that the Fire Nation invaded his home, he'll be devastated.

Aang: (calls from o.c.) Hey guys!

(Cut to him motioning toward a statue of an airbender monk.)

Aang: I want you to meet somebody.
Sokka: Who's that?
Aang: Monk Gyatso, the greatest airbender in the world. He taught me everything I know.

(Aang bows to the statue.)

(Camera closes in on the statue as the scene shifts to a hazy and surreal flashback sequence. A live version of the man whose statue Aang bowed to begins to speak.)

Gyatso: But the true secret...

(View expands to show Gyatso holding a long spatula with a cake at the end of it. He appears to have just pulled out the cake from the mouth of the large oven in the background. He airbends the colorful filling into an attractive pile in the middle of it.)

Gyatso: ... is in the gooey center!

(View expands again to show a preoccupied Aang in the foreground, sitting on the wall of the parapet. He's not paying attention.)

Aang: Hmm...
Gyatso: My ancient cake making technique isn't the only thing on your mind, is it, Aang?
Aang: This whole Avatar thing... maybe the monks made a mistake.

(Camera focuses on Gyatso in the background.)

Gyatso: The only mistake they made was telling you before you turned sixteen. But we can't concern ourselves with what was. We must act on what is.

(Gyatso gestures ceremoniously to the world around them. The view expands to show the air around the temple full of flying bison and other inhabitants. The beautiful, dreamlike surroundings are full of life.)

Aang: (o.c.) But Gyatso, how do I know if I'm ready for this?
Gyatso: (switch to view of Gyatso and Aang) Your questions will be answered when you are old enough to enter the Air Temple sanctuary. (Cut to Aang, while Gyatso continues o.c.) Inside you will meet someone who will guide you on your journey.
Aang: (excitedly as he jumps up to turn and face Gyatso fully) Who is it?
Gyatso: When you are ready he will reveal himself to you.

(Aang sighs heavily in frustration.)

Gyatso: Now, are you going to help me with these cakes, or not?
Aang: (smiling) All right.

(Aang and Gyatso assume airbending stances, with the four cakes sitting on the wall. They both cock back, creating balls of wind with their airbending skill as Gyatso counts.)

Gyatso: One... two... three!

(Both release their airballs on the count of three, propelling the cakes high into the air. They make a distinctive whizzing noise as they come down. The view switches to show four meditating monks, who are soon each wearing one of the four cakes. Sound effects mark each splattering as the cakes land, and the monks are soon surrounded by winged lemurs who begin feasting on the cakes.)

Aang and Gyatso: Hahaha!

(Aang and Gyatso bow to each other respectfully. Gyatso pats his young student's head affectionately.)

Gyatso: Your aim has improved greatly my young pupil.

(The flashback ends, with Aang bowing to the statue of Gyatso, just as he had bowed to the real Gyatso at the end of the flashback.)

Katara: (coming forward and placing a hand on Aang's shoulder.) You must miss him.
Aang: Yeah. (moves forward to go into the Temple)
Katara: Where are you going?
Aang: (climbing the steps.) The Air Temple Sanctuary. There's someone I'm ready to meet.

(Katara looks at Sokka, who shrugs. View shifts to an overhead shot of the three as they approach the entrance to the Air Temple Sanctuary. It is a huge wooden door that is dominated by an enormous woodcut comprised of three air symbols protruding from its surface. They are arranged in a triangular pattern. The symbols are attached to tubes that end in two horns near the bottom of the woodcut.)

Katara: But Aang... no one could have survived in there for a hundred years.
Aang: It's not impossible. I survived in the iceberg for that long.
Katara: Good point.
Aang: Katara, whoever's in there might help me figure out this Avatar thing!
Sokka: (Pops out from behind Aang eagerly.) And whoever's in there might have a medley of delicious, cured meats!

(Sokka rubs his hands together in fevered anticipation of the food that might await him. He rushes forward and runs straight into the door with a 'thunk.' He strains against the big door to no avail and slides down to the floor in defeat.)

Sokka: I don't suppose you have a key?
Aang: The key, Sokka, is airbending.

(There's a flash of light and the scene cuts to Aang's face as he composes himself and draws in his breath. He raises both his arms perpendicular to his body, then suddenly pushes forward with his arms and steps forward with his right leg. He airbends two jets of air, one from each arm, into the horns at the bottom of the woodcut. The air runs through the tubes and one by one flips the air symbols from the blue sides which had been showing to the maroon sides, which had been facing the interior of the temple. As each turns, it flips another mechanism on the outside of the door unlock it. The two leaves of the door open to reveal the dark, cavernous interior of the Air Temple Sanctuary.)

Aang: (calling inside) Hello? Anyone home?

(Cut to a wide shot of Aang walking into the dark room, then back to Katara and Sokka, who follow him. Scene fades to black.)

(Zhao crosses in front of a seated and clearly unhappy Prince Zuko. A pair of guards stand behind the young prince.)

Zhao: So, a twelve-year-old boy bested you and your firebenders? (View expands to show Iroh also seated nearby.) You're more pathetic than I thought.
Zuko: I underestimated him once, but it will not happen again.

(Cut to Zhao's face with Zuko in the background.)

Zhao: No, it will not, because you won't have a second chance.
Zuko: (alarmed) Commander Zhao, I've been hunting the Avatar for two years and I...

(Zhao turns on him angrily, flames erupting from his hand as he sweeps it in an arc from left to right.)

Zhao: And you failed!

(Camera pans upward on Zhao's face as he towers over Zuko.)

Zhao: Capturing the Avatar is too important to leave in a teenager's hands. He's mine now.

(Zuko launches himself at Zhao in frustration and anger, but he is restrained by the two guards standing behind his chair.)

Zhao: (to the guards as he turns to leave.) Keep them here.

(Zuko in a further act of frustration kicks over a small table that had been sitting near Iroh. It breaks into pieces. Iroh watches the scene calmly.)

Iroh: More tea please?

(Cut to Aang, Sokka, and Katara as they walk into the sanctuary. The camera pans right to reveal many statues arrayed in a pattern. The pattern is tied to a swirl pattern on the floor--a bluish version of the Yellow Brick Road--with the statues arrayed along it. The three walk among the statues, heading to the center of the room.)

Sokka: Statues?! That's it? Where's the meat?

(Scene cuts to Aang and Katara.)

Katara: Who are all these people?
Aang: (uncertain) I'm not sure, but it feels like I know them somehow. Look! (He points to a statue.) That one's an airbender!
Katara: (pointing) And this one's a waterbender. They're lined up in a pattern. Air, water, earth and fire.
Aang: That's the Avatar cycle.
Katara: Of course! They're Avatars. All these people are your past lives, Aang.
Aang: Wow! There's so many!

(The camera stays behind and shifts upward as Aang moves off screen, showing the many tiers of statues to illustrate just how many lives Aang has had before him.)

Sokka: (skeptical) Past lives? Katara, you really believe in that stuff?
Katara: It's true. When the Avatar dies he's reincarnated into the next nation in the cycle.

(Aang has stopped in front of a statue of a firebender Avatar. The POV flips back and forth between Aang and the statue. A light passes over its eyes, marking its importance. Katara appears behind Aang and shakes him by the shoulders).

Katara: Aang, snap out of it!
Aang: (dazed) Huh?
Katara: Who is that?
Aang: That's Avatar Roku, the Avatar before me.
Sokka: You were a firebender? No wonder I didn't trust you when we first met.
Katara: There's no writing. How do you know his name?
Aang: I'm not sure... I just know it somehow.
Sokka: (growls in frustration) You just couldn't get any weirder!

(The three sense the presence of another being and turn to look at the entrance. A long-eared shadow advances toward them. The screen pans back up, but the three are nowhere to be seen. When the view comes to rest again, we can see them huddled behind two of the statues, Aang and Katara behind one on the left of the screen, Sokka behind one on the right. The shadow advances between the two statues. Screen cuts to a profile view where we can see their frightened faces.)

Sokka: (whispering) Firebender. Nobody make a sound.
Katara: (exasperated) You're making a sound!
Aang and Sokka: Shhhh!

(The shadow advances. Screen cuts to black.)



Act III

(Fade in on the still advancing shadow.)

Sokka: (whispering, ready with his weapon) That firebender won't know what hit 'em.

(The long eared shadow is now right on top of them. The view pans up to reveal the black outline of a small animal in the doorway who is simply casting a lengthy shadow due to the angle of the sun outside. Camera cuts to behind the animal as Sokka jumps out from the statue, weapon at the ready. The other two also come around to look. Sound effects are heard as everyone's eyes blink, each registering the diminutive stature of the adorable intruder. The view switches to reveal a winged lemur looking at them with wide eyes. His long ears flop down on his back as he sees the people staring at him. He blinks his eyes to the same sounds effects. The camera gives a close-up of Aang.)

Aang: Lemur!
Sokka: (cut to Sokka, drooling) Dinner...
Aang: Don't listen to him! You're going to be my new pet.
Sokka: Not if I get him first!

(Both lunge at the small animal. The scene shifts to a joint POV of both Aang and Sokka, both with their bodies off screen, but their arms visibly outstretched towards the lemur as they rapidly close in on him. He bristles like a cat and dashes away from them, screaming. View changes to see them both running after the lemur who is now bolting out of the temple.)

Aang: (calling) Wait! Come back!

(Cuts to long shot of the entrance hallway. The lemur rockets out of the screen.)

Sokka: I wanna eat you!

(Aang and Sokka run back down the hallway from the Temple Sanctuary, chasing after the lemur. Both take turns leading the other. Sokka takes a swipe at Aang's legs with his weapon, but Aang, uses his airbending skills in a Matrix-style move to run along the wall beside Sokka and pass him, laughing as he does. Once far enough ahead, Aang stops, turns, and launches an airball spinning back toward Sokka. It hits him in the stomach and knocks him off his feet, like a bowling ball hitting one lone pin.)

Sokka: Oof!

(He falls flat on his face, his hood falling over his head.)

(Scene changes to where the hallway ends at a balcony, looking back into the temple. The lemur jumps up onto the guardrail of the balcony, looks back as Aang approaches, and then jumps off the guardrail almost into the camera. Aang jumps off after him, with the view expanding as he jumps off to provide a clear look at the long fall beneath him. Aang laughs as he falls, bouncing off the rocks beneath him as he continues to chase the lemur. The scene cuts to Sokka, who finally reaches the balcony, leaning over to watch Aang fall.)

Sokka: Hey! No Fair!

(View switches to a close up of Aang, eyes watering from the tremendous speed his body is falling at and smiling widely.)

(Zhao approaches the exterior of the large tent, opens the flaps and enters. Two guards standing ready inside the entrance draw their spears back.)

Zhao: My search party is ready.

(Cut to Iroh and Zuko, sitting in chairs facing each other.)

Zhao: Once I'm out to sea, my guards will escort you back to your ship and you'll be free to go.
Zuko: Why? Are you worried I'm going to try and stop you?
Zhao: (laughing) You? Stop me? Impossible.
Zuko: (Zuko stands in defiance.) Don't underestimate me, Zhao. I will capture the Avatar before you.
Iroh: (standing also) Prince Zuko, that's enough!
Zhao: You can't compete with me. I have hundreds of warships under my command, and you... you're just a banished prince. No home. No allies. Your own father doesn't even want you.
Zuko: You're wrong. Once I deliver the Avatar to my father he will welcome me home with honor and restore my rightful place on the throne.
Zhao: (cut to sliding right pan of Zhao's face) If your father really wanted you home, he'd have let you return by now, Avatar or no Avatar, but in his eyes you are a failure and a disgrace to the Fire Nation.
Zuko: That's not true.
Zhao: You have the scar to prove it.
Zuko: (With a cry of indignation, launches himself to his feet, bringing his face within inches of Zhao's.) Maybe you'd like one to match!
Zhao: Is that a challenge?
Zuko: An agni kai. At sunset.
Zhao: Very well. It's a shame your father won't be here to watch me humiliate you. I guess your uncle will do.

(Zhao turns and walks back out of the tent. The camera cuts to show a close-up of the left side of Zuko's face. Iroh visible in the background as the camera pans quickly to the right.)

Iroh: Prince Zuko, have you forgotten what happened last time you dueled a master?
Zuko: I will never forget.

(The scene ends with only the right half of Zuko's face, the side with the scar, visible on the screen.)

(A quick shot of the exterior of the temple atop the mountain is replaced by a view of a stone clearing that has an ascending stone staircase in the background. The lemur that Aang has been chasing lands on the ground. Aang pounces him and misses. The view pans left as the lemur runs through a curtain made of decaying tent material or drapery.)

Aang: Hey! Come back!

(Aang follows the lemur to the other side of the curtain.)

Aang: Come on out, little lemur. That hungry guy won't bother you anymore.

(Aang approaches another drape, parts it, and walks through. He draws a sharp breath, startled at what he sees. Cut to show heaps of firebender uniforms and skeletons covering the floor of a decaying building.)

Aang: (surprised) Firebenders? They were here?

(At the back of the grotto lies the skeletal remains of an airbender monk, bathed in sunlight coming from above, who had apparently fallen in combat fighting against great odds. The camera zooms in on the airbender's necklace as a means of identification.)

Aang: Gyatso...

(He falls to his knees, devastated.)

Sokka: (pulling back the curtain) Hey Aang, you find my dinner yet?

(He sees Aang, head in his hands, crying.)

Sokka: Aang, I wasn't really going to eat the lemur, okay? (He sees the skeleton and does a doubletake.) Oh, man... come on, Aang, everything will be all right. Let's get out of here.

(Sokka puts his hand on Aang's shoulder as the arrow on Aang's head begins to glow incandescent blue. The camera shifts to Aang's face, his eyes are glowing brightly in an angry expression as he lifts his head. Sokka gasps as he looks on in alarm.)

(Scene shifts to Katara walking among the statues in the Temple Sanctuary. She stops in front of Roku, whose eyes light up with the same incandescent blue light as Aang's. The eyes of all the other statues light up in order around the room. The camera pans up so the audience can see all the statues' eyes light up in succession.)

Katara: (worried) Aang!

(Katara races from the room. Scene shifts to earth, water, and fire temples scattered across the globe, where lights flash in response to the awakening of Aang's avatar spirit. In the fire temple, an old fire sage leans out to say something to another sage outside of the room where the signal is emanating from.)

Old Sage: Send word to the Fire Lord immediately. The Avatar has returned! (Recipient fire sage's face becomes frightened.)

(Scene shifts back to an exterior view of the dilapidated building at the base of the temple where Aang mourns Gyatso's body. The view shifts again to Aang's feet, where a whirlwind begins to form, air swirling fast around the bones lying on the ground. The camera pans up to Aang, crouched, his hands balled into fists and his eyes and arrow glowing, the wind picking up terrible speed around him.)

Sokka: Aang! Come on, snap out of it!

(A light blue sphere of energy surrounds Aang and begins to expand, knocking Sokka back out of the building.)

Sokka: Aaahhh!

(The energy sphere expands to the point where it blows most of the building apart, sending smoke and debris high into the air, which the camera follows. Sokka lands outside the building. The camera switches back to Aang, now partially obscured by the energy sphere and the maelstrom. Katara joins Sokka behind some rubble, both shielding their faces from the wind.)

Katara: What happened?
Sokka: He found out firebenders killed Gyatso.
Katara: Oh no, it's his avatar spirit! He must have triggered it! I'm gonna try and calm him down.
Sokka: (Hanging onto the rubble, trying not to get blown away.) Well, do it before he blows us off the mountain!

(Katara slowly approaches Aang, struggling against the wind, as Aang and his energy sphere slowly rise into the air.)

(Cut to an exterior view of a Fire Nation arena, a simple four-walled structure with watch fires on the four towers at each corner. There is one large open gate. The sunset is a glorious mixture of Fire Nation hues: red, orange, and yellow. The view shifts to inside the arena where Zhao and Zuko kneel, preparing for battle, Zhao with four of his men in attendance, Zuko with his uncle.)

Iroh: Remember your firebending basics, Prince Zuko. They are your greatest weapons.
Zuko: (standing up) I refuse to let him win.

(His shoulder wrap falls to the ground ceremoniously. View shifts to Zhao. He stands and turns, his shoulder wrap falling to the ground, as well.)

Zhao: This will be over quickly.

(Atop the gate a gong sounds. Both men face each other and assume firebending stances. The screen splits: the upper pane is a close up of Zhao's face, the lower a close up of Zuko's. Prince Zuko fires the first shot which passes harmlessly to Zhao's left. He fires again; this time it passes without effect to Zhao's right. Zuko fires several more, the last of which Zhao blocks, satisfaction evident on his face. Frustrated and losing control of his breath, Zuko moves towards his opponent, unleashing more fire from both his hands and feet. Zhao dodges or blocks them all. Zhao then crouches forward and shoots flame at a point on the ground close in front of him. Camera switches to Iroh, watching anxiously.)

Iroh: Basics, Zuko! Break his root!

(Zhao fires many volleys of flame, alternating between his fists. Zuko blocks each, but is slowly forced back. On the last volley Zhao uses both hands, knocking Zuko over and sending him skidding backwards in the dirt. Zhao takes a flying jump at him. Zhao lands as Zuko tries to get up, but he isn't fast enough. Zhao fires right at him. Zuko rolls out of the way just in time, and as he is getting up sweeps Zhao's feet out from under him. The move holds such importance that it is shown three times from slightly different camera angles at reduced speed.)

(Zuko lands on his feet. Camera switches to a close up of Zuko's face, where a slight smile appears. Camera switches to a close up of Zuko's feet. Zuko is advancing towards Zhao, using his feet to produce small waves of flame that rush toward his opponent. Zhao is caught off balance and wobbles slowly backward. Camera switches to Iroh, fists clenched in an expression of hope, a smile beginning to spread over his face. Switch back to Zuko, who finally lays Zhao out flat on the ground with a blast of fire. Zuko rushes up to him, prepared to deal the final blow. A close up of Zuko's face emphasizes the decision he faces. Cut to Zhao.)

Zhao: Do it!

(Zuko releases a blast that shoots off screen. He stands erect, dropping his fighting stance. View changes to a smoking hole in the ground, and then the screen expands to show Zhao, clearly very much unharmed, next to the hole.)

Zhao: That's it? Your father raised a coward.
Zuko: Next time you get in my way, I promise I won't hold back.

(Zuko turns his back and begins to walk away. Zhao gets up and, with a howl of anger, unleashes a whip of flame at Zuko. The POV changes to the flame itself as it rushes toward Zuko's back. The view switches back to Zhao and his outstretched foot, wreathed in the fire it has just released. The flame is extinguished, however, as a hand closes over the foot. The camera changes to a side view, where Iroh has moved between them to stop the dishonorable attack. They remain frozen for a moment before Iroh hurls Zhao back into the dirt with little effort. Zuko rushes to avenge the insult, but is stopped by his uncle.)

Iroh: No, Prince Zuko. Do not taint your victory.

(Iroh turns to face Zhao, a look of condescension on his face.)

Iroh: So this is how the great Commander Zhao acts in defeat. (Camera switches to Zhao and Iroh continues o.c.) Disgraceful.

(Camera returns to Iroh and Zuko.)

Iroh: Even in exile my nephew is more honorable than you. (Zuko looks at his uncle in surprise at this comment.) Thanks again for the tea. It was delicious.

(Iroh moves to leave and Zuko follows close behind. With subdued anger, Zhao watches them exit the gate of the arena. Outside, Zuko and Iroh talk.)

Zuko: (quietly) Did you really mean that, Uncle?
Iroh: (slyly) Of course. I told you ginseng tea is my favorite.

(Switch to long shot view of them leaving the arena and walking back to the ships in the harbor.)

(Cut to Aang, still suspended in mid-air inside his ball of raw energy. The contained storm continues to rage as Katara and Sokka cling desperately to the rocks at the bottom of the screen.)

Katara: (shouting calmly) Aang, I know you're upset...

(Camera switches to full view of Katara clinging to a rock, Sokka visible behind her.)

Katara: ... and I know how hard it is to lose the people you love. I went through the same thing when I lost my mom. Monk Gyatso and the other airbenders may be gone, but you still have a family. Sokka and I, we're your family now.

(The view switches back to Aang towards the end of Katara's statement, and he begins to descend when she is finished. His feet gently alight on the ground. The wind dies away. Switch to Aang, his eyes and arrow still glowing. Katara and Sokka come up on either side of him.)

Sokka: (gently) Katara and I aren't going to let anything happen to you. Promise.

(Katara takes one of Aang's hands in her own. The glow instantly fades from his eyes and arrow markings. Grief-stricken and exhausted, he collapses into Katara's arms and she holds him around his shoulders as they kneel on the ground.)

Aang: (tired) I'm sorry.
Katara: It's okay. It wasn't your fault.
Aang: (sadly) But you were right. And if firebenders found this temple that means they found the other ones, too. I really am the last airbender.

(Katara holds him tighter and Sokka puts a hand on Aang's shoulder. Scene cuts back to the Temple Sanctuary, where Aang stands once again in front of the statue of Avatar Roku. Katara comes up behind him.)

Katara: Everything's packed. You ready to go?
Aang: (still looking at the statue) How is Roku supposed to help me if I can't talk to him?
Katara: Maybe you'll find a way.

(They both turn around to see a familiar furry creature in the doorway of the temple. The lemur has returned. View switches to behind the lemur, who has Aang and Katara in front of him and Sokka to his right. He runs to Sokka and deposits a bunch of fruits and nuts at his feet. Sokka begins to eat hungrily as the lemur dashes away. Camera cuts back to Aang and Katara, watching with smiles on their faces.)

Aang: Looks like you made a new friend, Sokka.
Sokka: (mouth full) Can't talk. Must eat.
Aang: (as the lemur scurries up his chest to perch on his head.) Hey little guy.

(Scene switches to outside of the Temple. Screen pans down to show Appa, Aang, and the lemur looking out at the abandoned temple.)

Aang: You, me, and Appa. (View switches to frontal shot of the three.) We're all that's left of this place. We have to stick together. Katara, Sokka...

(Camera switches to Katara and Sokka, the latter's mouth still full, a fruit in his hand.)

Aang: ... say hello to the newest member of our family.

(Aang approaches them both, the lemur on his arm.)

Katara: What are you going to name him?
Aang: (surprised as the lemur jumps off camera and returns a second later with a fruit.) Momo.

(Screen expands to show all three, with Sokka poised to bite a fruit that is no longer in his hand. Aang and Katara begin to laugh. Switch to a twilight view of the temple. View shifts to Aang watching the temple recede in the distance as Appa flies them away. Aang looks back with sadness as the clouds finally obscure his childhood home from view.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Scene opens with a shot of the star filled evening sky. The camera pans down to Prince Zuko's ship gliding through the ocean. Scene cuts to a slow pan of his quarters aboard the ship. Zuko is seen sitting in the lotus position in front of an altar. Four white candles are burning in front of him. The camera continues to pan as the light from the candles increases and decreases with Zuko's rhythmic breathing. Cut to a frontal shot of Zuko with eyes closed in meditation. His face is calm and concentrated. The camera cuts to a side view of Zuko's head on the left half of the screen with the door to his quarters on the right side. The door opens and General Iroh enters the room.)

Zuko: (in a dangerously silky voice) The only reason you should be interrupting me is if you have news about the Avatar.
Iroh: (enters cautiously carrying a map) Well, there is news, Prince Zuko, but you might not like it. Don't get too upset.
Zuko: (calmly) Uncle, you taught me that keeping a level head is a sign of a great leader. Now whatever you have to say, I'm sure that I can take it.
Iroh: Okay, then... we have no idea where he is.
Zuko: (enraged) WHAT?!

(The four candles flare to the ceiling with Zuko's wrath. He stands quickly and turns around to face his uncle, his anger evident on his face. Iroh turns away from the flames and raises his right arm to protect his face. As the flames subside, he pulls a fan out of his robes.)

Iroh: (fanning himself) You really should open a window in here.
Zuko: (snatching the map from Iroh's hand) Give me the map!

(Zuko opens the rolled scroll and begins to study it. Iroh continues to fan himself.)

Iroh: There have been multiple sightings of the Avatar, but he is impossible to track down.
Zuko: How am I gonna find him, Uncle?

(He looks down at the map marked with circled Xs and dotted lines connecting the reported Avatar sightings. The lines zigzag all over the landmass drawings.)

Zuko: He is clearly a master of evasive maneuvering.

(Scene ends with a fade from the map in Zuko's hands to the map in Sokka's hands. Scene cuts to a close up of Sokka reading the map. He is sitting atop Appa with an exasperated expression on his face.)

Sokka: You have no idea where you're going, do you?

(Scene cuts to a wider angle of Sokka, Katara, and Aang riding Appa through the air.)

Aang: (turning his head back to answer Sokka) Weeelll, I know it's near water...

(Scene cuts to a distant view of Appa flying over an endless stretch of water.)

Sokka: (flatly) I guess we're getting close then.

(Scene cuts to Katara mending a garment. Aang has his head turned back, watching her. Momo, who is also watching Katara, is sitting on Aang's left shoulder.)

Aang: Momo, marbles please.

(Momo scrambles into Aang's shirt making noises. He returns with a marble and hands it to Aang.)

Aang: (smiling eagerly and cupping the marble in his two hands) Hey Katara! Check out this airbending trick!

(Aang suspends the marble between his two hands and makes it whirl around and around in mid-air. He is grinning happily at Katara, wanting her attention. Katara is preoccupied, though, and does not look up from her sewing.)

Katara: (absentmindedly) That's great, Aang.
Aang: (crushed that she did not notice) You didn't even look.
Katara: (stops her sewing and looks at him) That's great!
Aang: But I'm not doing it now.

(Scene cuts to a shot of just Sokka and Katara. Sokka is lolling at the back of Appa's saddle with his arms crossed casually behind his head.)

Sokka: (waves his arm dismissively in Aang and Katara's direction) Stop bugging her, airhead. You need to give girls space when they do their sewing.

(Scene cuts to a close up of Katara's face. She stops her needle in midair and turns her head towards Sokka. Her face is a mixture of annoyance and anger.)

Katara: What does me being a girl have to do with sewing?

(Scene cuts back to Sokka)

Sokka: Simple: girls are better at fixing pants than guys, and guys are better at hunting and fighting and stuff like that. It's just the natural order of things.
Katara: (with exaggerated happiness) All done with your pants! And look what a great job I did!

(Katara glowers at Sokka and throws his pants at him. They hit him in the head.)

Sokka: Wait! I was just kidding! I can't wear these! (He sticks his arm through the big hole in the seat of his pants.) Katara, PLEASE!

(Scene cuts to a frontal shot of all three on Appa's back.)

Aang: Don't worry, Sokka. Where we're going, you won't need any pants!

(He gives a pull on the reings and Appa and swoops down in the sky, glowering . The scene shifts to an aerial view of a crescent-shaped island. Scene cuts to Appa, Aang, Katara, and Sokka on a beach. Snow-capped mountains are visible in the background.

Sokka: We just made a pit stop yesterday. Shouldn't we get a little more flying done before we camp out?
Katara: He's right. At this rate we won't get to the North Pole until spring.
Aang: (shading his face and looking out over the water) But Appa's tired already, aren't you boy? I said, aren't you boy?

(Aang nudges Appa conspiratorially with his elbow. Appa yawns on cue, but is obviously not actually tired. Aang sticks his thumb in the big bison's direction.)

Sokka: Yeah, that was real convincing. Still, hard to argue with a ten ton magical monster.
Aang: (gasps excitedly and points out towards the water) LOOK! (A giant koi fish jumps out of the water.) That's why we're here... (Aang strips down to his underwear.)... elephant koi. And I'm going to ride it. Katara, you've gotta watch me! (Aang dives into the water. A second later he leaps out again with a shocked expression on his face.) COLD!

(Scene cuts to Katara and Sokka looking at each other wryly. Sokka makes the univeral "he's crazy" signal by twirling his finger next to his head. Cut to Aang swimming out into the bay. Aang dives under the water and catches hold of an elephant koi. The giant fish leaps out of the water with Aang riding on its back, his hands grasping the dorsal fin. The koi dives back into the water, carrying Aang with it.

(Scene cuts to Katara watching Aang. She has an excited and interested look on her face, clearly enjoying his current antics. Sokka, Katara, and Momo stand on shore and watch Aang. Scene cuts to a close up of Aang on the back of the elephant koi. Laughing, he waves to Katara. Cut to Katara on shore waving to Aang.)

Katara: (waving) Woo!
Aang: Yeeaaaah! Woohoo! (Aang is laughing, ecstatic as he rides the giant koi fish. A couple of other fish follow behind, leaping in and out of the water.

(All the giant koi fish dive underwater and the camera follows them. Cut to Katara and Sokka on the shore. Momo is jumping up and down, watching Aang intently.)

Katara: He looks pretty good out there.
Sokka: Are you kidding? The fish is doing all the work.
Katara: (Katara turns to see look at something happening off screen.) No, Appa! Don't eat that! (Katara hurries off screen as Sokka continues to watch Aang.)

(Scene cuts to a close up of Aang riding the elephant koi. He grins broadly at Katara, who runs towards the trees. Aang is disappointed that she is no longer watching him.)

Aang: Aww, man...

(Scene cuts to a long view of the bay. Three elephant koi are visible swimming on the surface of the water. Two of the koi, including the one Aang is riding, veer off to the right. A shadow under the water is visible approaching the remaining elephant koi. Scene cuts to a close up of Sokka on shore.)

Sokka: (yells) There's something in the water!

(Scene cuts to the last koi fish trying to leap out of the water, but being pulled under. Cut to a close up of Aang still riding his koi fish. Something is approaching him from behind. Cut back to the shore. Momo, distressed, is jumping up and down. Katara, hearing the commotion, runs up beside Sokka back on the beach.)

Katara: What's wrong?
Sokka: Aang's in trouble. (yells) Aang!
Katara: (screams) Get out of there!

(Scene cuts to Aang on the fish. He is watching Katara, Sokka and Momo on the shore. They are waving their arms and yelling to him.)

Sokka: Come back here! AANG!
Katara: AANG!

(Scene cuts to Aang waving back at Sokka and Katara, misinterpreting their frantic gestures. The koi fish he is riding bucks and sends Aang headlong into the bay. He comes up a second after going under and spurts water out of his mouth. He is breathing heavily and gasping for air as an enormous serrated fin rises ominously from the water behind him. Cut to a wide shot of a very tiny Aang against the fin's back drop. Cut to a close up of Aang's back as he turns around slowly to see what's following close behind him. His eyes widen and he screams in panic.)

Aang: Aaahhh!

(Aang leaps to the surface of the water and begins to run towards shore. The enormous fin turns and begins to chase him. Cut to a wide shot of the chase as the fin gains on Aang. He reaches the shore, running head first and full force into Sokka. Aang knocks Sokka off his feet and they both crash back towards the tree line. The fin turns and slowly heads back out to sea. Katara runs back to where Aang and Sokka are. Aang is putting his clothes back on while Sokka sits lumped up against the tree they skidded into.)

Katara: What was that thing?
Aang: I don't know.
Sokka: (getting up and wiping his hands together) Well, let's not stick around and find out. Time to hit the road.

(Scene cuts to an aerial view. Four green clad warriors fall on Aang, Sokka, Katara, and Momo from the trees. The first warrior grabs Sokka under his arms from behind. The second warrior pulls Katara's hood over her head. The third warrior grabs Aang by his shirt. The fourth warrior traps Momo in a small sack. Cut to Momo, Aang, Katara, and Sokka, all bound and blindfolded being thrown to the ground at the feet of their captors. Four sets of green-robed legs are visible in a circle around them.)

Momo: (hits the ground) Oof!
Aang: (thrown to the ground) Ugh!
Katara: (thrown to the ground) Uhh...
Sokka: (thrown to the ground) Oof... Or we could stay a while...

(Scene cuts to a snow covered mountain path, lined on both sides by the wintry forest. The camera pans up towards the mountain peak. Scene cuts to the back of the village leader, Oyagi. He has long gray hair, with a high poofy ponytail on top of his head. The camera pans to the left to show Aang, Sokka, and Katara, still blindfolded, bound to a large pole in a fenced clearing. Momo, still in a sack, is at Aang's feet.)

Oyagi: You three have some explaining to do.
Suki: And if you don't answer all our questions, we're throwing you back in the water with the unagi.
Sokka: (close-up of his angry face) Show yourselves, cowards!

(Cut to black. Scene changes as Sokka's, Aang's and Katara's blindfolds are removed to reveal five young girls dressed in green. Their faces are painted white with red around their eyes, and they carry fans in their waistbands. Scene cuts to a wide shot of Aang, Sokka, Katara, and Momo tied to the pole on the left of the screen. The green clad girls and Oyagi are on the right.)

Sokka: (straining at his bonds) Who are you? Where are the men who ambushed us?
Suki: (stepping toward Sokka and shaking her fist at him) There were no men. We ambushed you. Now tell us, who are you and what are you doing here?
Sokka: (in laughing disbelief) Wait a second, there's no way that a bunch of girls took us down.

(Scene cuts to a close up of Sokka and Suki. She grabs him by the collar and shakes him.)

Suki: (threateningly) A bunch of girls, huh? The unagi's gonna eat well tonight.
Katara: (quickly) No, don't hurt him! He didn't mean it. My brother is just an idiot sometimes.
Aang: (apologetically) It's my fault. I'm sorry we came here. I wanted to ride the elephant koi.

(Scene cuts to a wide shot of Oyagi flanked by four of the female warriors. The houses of the village can be seen in the background.)

Oyagi: (pointing at Aang accusingly) How do we know you're not Fire Nation spies? Kyoshi stayed out of the war so far. And we intend to keep it that way!

(Scene cuts to a close up of Aang. His face is a mixture of surprise and interest.)

Aang: This island is named for Kyoshi? I know Kyoshi!
Oyagi: Ha! How could you possibly know her? Avatar Kyoshi was born here four hundred years ago. She's been dead for centuries.

(The camera pans up the pole Aang, Sokka, and Katara are tied to as he speaks, which turns out to be the base Avatar Kyoshi's statue. She is dressed in the same green garments as the female warriors who captured Aang, Sokka, and Katara. Her face is painted white and there are two open fans in her hands. Scene cuts back to a close up of Aang. He looks down toward the ground and then back at Oyagi.)

Aang: I know her because I'm the Avatar.

(Scene cuts to Suki, the warriors, and Oyagi. His face shows shock and disbelief.)

Suki: (shaking her fist at Aang) That's impossible! The last Avatar was an airbender who disappeared a hundred years ago.

(Scene cuts back to the trio tied to the base of the statue. Aang grins widely.)

Aang: That's me!

(Scene cuts back Oyagi and Suki.)

Oyagi: Throw the imposter to the unagi!

(Oyagi walks off screen. The female warriors assume a fighting stance. Each warrior has two open fans in her hands. The four warriors move menacingly toward the helpless trio. Scene cuts to a close up of Katara's face.)

Katara: (tersely) Aang... do some airbending...

(Scene cuts to a wide shot of the pole and approaching warriors. Aang breaks his bonds and shoots himself into the air. He backflips over the top of Kyoshi's statue. The camera follows him as he floats gracefully to the ground amidst the 'oohs' and 'aahs' of the gathered crowd, which now includes other members of the village. POV is from behind Aang. Suki and her warriors gaze in shock and amazement at Aang.)

Oyagi: It's true... you are the Avatar!

(Scene cuts to Aang with a serious look on his face. In the background to his left Sokka and Katara are still tied to the statue base. Aang, realizing that he now has an audience, pulls the marble out from under his shirt.)

Aang: Now... check this out!

(Grinning like a fool, he does the same trick he had tried to impress Katara with earlier in the episode.)

(Scene cuts to the villagers cheering and jumping for joy. The villager toward the front right screams like a girl and gets so excited that he begins to foam at the mouth. He faints and falls forward toward the camera.)

(The scene cuts to a small girl running eagerly across a pier to a fisherman who is lifting his catch out of the water in a conical basket.)

Little Girl: Did you hear the news? The Avatar's on Kyoshi!

Fisherman: (drops his basket of fish in shock and surprise.) HUH? (He quickly picks his basket up again.)

(Here the information grapevine montage begins. Scene cuts to a small street in the village. The fisherman from the previous scene hands his basket of fish to a merchant. You see his lips move as he reports the news that the Avatar is on Kyoshi. The scene cuts to the merchant in front of his shop. The shop is along the water. The merchant is selling a fish to a man. You can see his lips moving as he reports the news that the Avatar is on Kyoshi to his customer, who from his clothes appears to be Fire Nation. The scene fades to the interior of Zuko's quarters. The customer who purchased the fish from the merchant turns out to be Zuko's cook. He is serving the cooked fish to Zuko and Iroh. He kneels down to place the dish on the table. Scene switches to a close up of Zuko's face.)

Zuko: (standing up and speaking angrily) The Avatar's on Kyoshi Island? (Zuko walks out of the room while speaking to Iroh.) Uncle, ready the rhinos. He's not getting away from me this time.

(Switch to a wide view of Iroh sitting at the dinner table with the steaming hot plate of fish in front of him. Zuko walks off screen. Iroh turns towards him and, pointing at the fish, begins to speak.)

Iroh: Are you going to finish that?

(Zuko walks angrily back on camera to the dinner table and grabs the fish off of the table.)

Zuko: I was going to save it for later! (He storms off screen with his meal.)

(Iroh crosses his arms in annoyance and pouts at not getting to eat the fish. Scene fades to black for commercial.)



Act II

(Scene opens with a close up of the face of Avatar Kyoshi's statue. The camera pans out to show two villagers attending to the statue. One is painting a fresh coat of color on her face and the other is scrubbing the dirt from the back. The camera pans down the statue and to the village. It is morning and there are only a few villagers on the main street. Everything is peaceful and quiet in the sunlight.)

(Scene cuts to Appa. He is lying on his side munching on fresh hay. Two villagers are caring for him. One villager scrubs his fur and another is buffing Appa's horns. Appa grunts happily and is clearly enjoying all the attention. The camera pans up to the windows of the house behind Appa. Scene cuts to Momo, Aang, and Katara seated in front of a long wooden table. The table is covered with eighteen different plates of food. A villager enters and places another plate on the table and exits. Aang throws his arms up in the air happily.)

Aang: All right! Dessert for breakfast! (stuffing his face and talking with his mouth full) These people sure know how to treat an Avatar!

(Camera view switches to a frontal shot of Aang and Katara eating breakfast. They are seated in front of a large window, which is propped open to show the mountain in the background. Also in view are the two villagers actively refurbishing the statue of Avatar Kyoshi.)

Aang: Mmm... Katara you've got to try these! (Aang offers Katara a sweet)
Katara: Well, maybe just a bite... (She takes the candy from Aang as Momo seizes the opportunity and snatches another from his other hand.)
Aang: (looking off screen) Sokka, what's your problem? EAT!

(Scene cuts to a very disgruntled Sokka sitting hunched and glowering in the corner of the room.)

Sokka: Not hungry.

(Camera view switches to a close up of Aang's face as he peers around Katara's head. He is shocked.)

Aang: But you're always hungry!

(Cut to a long shot of the room. Aang and Katara at the breakfast table are in the forefront. Sokka is in the back of the shot.)

Katara: He's just upset because a bunch of girls kicked his butt yesterday.
Sokka: They snuck up on me!
Katara: (smugly) Right. And then they kicked your butt.
Sokka: (getting up angrily) Sneak attacks don't count! (pacing around the room, gesticulating wildly to the air) Tie me up with ropes! I'll show them a thing or two. I'm not scared of any girls. (He has paced around to the breakfast table and is ferociously grabbing sweets off it. He begins to lower his voice and talk to himself.) Who do they think they are anyway? (Sokka grunts and shoves a sweet into his mouth. He walks off camera and out of the room.) Mmm... this is tasty.

(Camera switches back to the same frontal shot of Aang and Katara at the table.)

Aang: What's he so angry about? It's great here. They're giving us the royal treatment.
Katara: Hey, don't get too comfortable. It's risky for us to stay in one place for very long.
Aang: I'm sure we'll be fine. Besides, did you see how happy I'm making this town? (Aang turns around to look out the window at the two villagers working on Avatar Kyoshi's statue.) They're even cleaning up that statue in my honor!
Katara: Well, it's nice to see you excited about being the Avatar. I just hope it doesn't all go to your head.
Aang: Come on, you know me better than that. I'm just a simple monk.

(Aang stands up and goes to the window. He looks down in surprise and confusion as the scene cuts to the courtyard from Aang's perspective. The courtyard is full of little girls from the village, screaming and cheering at him. Scene cuts back to Aang and Katara at the window. Aang's face breaks out in a large smile and he blushes. Katara, standing slightly behind him, crosses her arms, sticks her tongue out and makes a long, exasperated raspberry.)

(Scene cuts to a bright red bridge over a small stream. The quiet of the scene is interrupted as Aang runs back and forth over the bridge while being hotly pursued by the pack of young village girls. The group ends up splitting and coming at him from both sides of the bridge as he stands in the middle of it. Aang jumps high in the air and off camera as the groups merge together beneath him, waiting for him to come back down. The camera moves upward to reveal what's taking him so long: he has his arms wrapped around a spinning ball of air. It dissipates and he falls into the arms of the crowd below.)

(After this "Meet the Beatles" type shenanigans, the scene cuts to Aang standing next to Koko, one of the young girls from the village. An artist puts up his paintbrush next to them as a reference for painting the scene. He lifts his paper to begin his ink painting, covering the spot where Aang and Koko are standing.)

Artist: (to himself while he paints) Painting the Avatar... that's easy enough...

(He drops his parchment for another look and now there are two girls standing with Aang.)

Artist: Oh... there's another one... I'll make an adjustment here, and...

(When he drops his painting now, there are four girls standing around Aang.)

Artist: There's more... what...

(Now when he views the scene it appears that every girl in the village has joined the group. The Camera gives a close up of the artist's face. He has a look of utter disbelief and irritation. Cut back to the group as they all crowd in close to Aang and laugh while he has something of a horrified expression on his face. After surveying the scene for a few seconds, the artist gets up from his stool and walks away. The girls collapse on top of Aang into a laughing pile.)

(Scene cuts to a frontal shot of Aang doing push ups in front of six of the girls. Momo is sitting on his back. The girls are staring down at him in rapt admiration. Aang begins to do one handed push ups. Then, he puts both hands behind his back and uses his breath to push himself up off the ground. The camera switches to a side view of Aang and the girls while he is still doing airbending push ups with his breath. Katara walks past them carrying a basket, rolling her eyes.)

(Scene cuts to small house nestled in evergreen trees. Sokka approaches the house muttering to himself about "girls." He walks up to the door and looks inside. The fan warriors are drilling. Camera switches to a close up of Sokka's face from around the doorway. He grins, puts up his hands, and enters the dojo.)

Sokka: (in a bit of an arrogant manner) Sorry ladies! Didn't mean to interrupt your dance lesson. (He stretches his arms and waist.) I was just looking for somewhere to get a little workout? (He bends over and grabs his knees with his hands.)
Suki: Well, you're in the right place.

(There's a long shot of the dojo to show the entire area and all the people inside it. Sokka continues to stretch in front of the female warriors.)

Suki: (sincerely) Sorry about yesterday. I didn't know that you were friends with the Avatar.
Sokka: (flippantly) It's all right. I mean, normally I'd hold a grudge, but seeing as you guys are a bunch of girls, I'll make an exception. (He rotates his shoulders.)
Suki: (with sarcasm) I should hope so. A big strong man like you? We wouldn't stand a chance.
Sokka: True. But don't feel bad. After all, I'm the best warrior in my village.
Suki: (leaning towards Sokka and smiling) Wow! Best warrior, huh? In your whole village? Maybe you'd be kind enough to give us a little demonstration.
Sokka: Oh... well... I mean... I...
Suki: (turning to her warriors) Come on, girls! Wouldn't you like him to show us some moves?

(The camera show the group of warriors, giggling and nodding affirmatively at Suki's suggestion. The scene switches back to Sokka and Suki. Sokka turns and walks towards her.)

Sokka: Well, if that's what you want, I'd be happy to. All right, you stand over there. (He grasps her shoulders and pushes her back a little, but Suki doesn't move. He doesn't seem to notice or care.) This may be a little tough, but try to block me.

(Sokka throws a punch. Suki blocks it with a deft thrust of her fan to his shoulder. Her stance is disinterested and confident against Sokka's arrogance.)

Sokka: (rubbing his shoulder) Heh heh... good. Of course, I was going easy on you.
Suki: Of course.
Sokka: Let's see if you can handle this!

(Sokka lunges at Suki. She catches him under his leg and tosses backward toward the door. He lands on his butt.)

Sokka: (angrily) That does it!

(Sokka gets up and lunges again at Suki. She grabs him by the arm, spins him around in circles, ties his arm to his foot with his own belt, and throws him to the floor.)

Suki: (standing over Sokka laughing) Anything else you want to teach us?

(Sokka's face flushes in humiliation as all the warriors laugh at him.)

(Scene opens with a long shot of the village. The statue of Avatar Kyoshi is in the foreground. The camera zooms in on Aang and the cluster of girls at its base as they stare up at it.)

Aang: There she is, girls. Me in a past life.
Girls: Ooohhh...
Koko: You were pretty!
Aang: Excuse me for a second, ladies.

(Scene cuts to Katara in the market place filling a basket with vegetables. Aang approaches her and taps her on the shoulder.)

Katara: (turning around) Oh, good! Can you help me carry this back to the room? It's a little heavy.
Aang: Actually, I can't right now.
Katara: (irritated) What do you mean you can't?
Aang: I promised the girls that I'd give them a ride on Appa. Why don't
you come with us? It'll be fun!
Katara: (continuing to pick up vegetables) Watching you show off for a bunch of girls does not sound like fun.
Aang: Well, neither does carrying your basket.
Katara: It's not my basket. These supplies are for our trip. I told you, we have to leave Kyoshi soon.
Aang: I don't want to leave Kyoshi yet. I can't put my finger on it, but there's something I really like about this place.

(Camera pans from a close up of Aang to the group of girls who have been following him around all day. They giggle.)

Koko: (stomping her foot in annoyance and putting her hands on her hips) What's taking you so long, Aangy?

Katara: (flatly) Aangy...
Aang: (calling back) Just a second, Koko!
Katara: 'Simple monk,' huh? I thought you promised me that this Avatar stuff wouldn't go to your head.
Aang: It didn't. You know what I think? You just don't want to come because you're jealous.
Katara: Jealous? Of what?
Aang: Jealous that we're having so much fun without you.
Katara: (ferociously putting vegetables into her basket) That's ridiculous.
Aang: It is a little ridiculous, but I understand.

(Katara looks angrily at Aang as they stand framed by the vegetable stand. She groans loudly, picks up the basket, and walks away from him. Aang watches her go as the giggling girls drag him off camera in the other direction.)

(Scene opens with Sokka kicking a stone outside of the fan warrior's dojo. He walks cautiously to the door. Suki and her warriors are training again, but stop when they see Sokka walk in.)

Sokka: (hesitantly) Uh... hey, Suki.
Suki: (mockingly) Hoping for another dance lesson?
Sokka: No... I... well, let me explain.
Suki: Spit it out! What do you want?
Sokka: (kneeling in humility) I would be honored if you would teach me.
Suki: Even if I'm a girl?
Sokka: (quietly) I'm sorry if I insulted you earlier. I was wrong.
Suki: We normally don't teach outsiders, let alone boys.
Sokka: Please make an exception. I won't let you down.
Suki: All right. But you have to follow all of our traditions.
Sokka: (quickly) Of course!
Suki: And I mean ALL of them.

(Scene cuts to Sokka in the full green dress and white face paint of the fan warriors.)

Sokka: Do I really have to wear this? It feels a little... girly.
Suki: It's a warrior's uniform. You should be proud. (Camera pans down Sokka's body) The silk threads symbolizes the brave blood that flows through our veins. The gold insignia represents the honor of the warrior's heart.
Sokka: (standing proudly) Bravery and honor.

(Aang walks by the door to the dojo. He turns and ducks his head in smiling mischievously.)

Aang: (giggling and racing off) Hey Sokka! Nice dress!

(Scene ends with Sokka and Suki standing in front of the doorway. Sokka's momentary pride is visibly crushed by Aang's barb. Suki is smiling at him and enjoying his discomfort.)

(Scene opens with Katara practicing her waterbending in their room. A plume of water rises and falls from a small bowl in front of her. Aang enters the room and stands cockily in the doorway.)

Aang: Katara, remember how the unagi almost got me yesterday?
Katara: (without looking up from her bowl) Yeah.
Aang: Well, I'm gonna go ride it now. It's gonna be REAL dangerous.
Katara: (still not looking up from her bowl) Good for you.
Aang: (surprised) You're not going to stop me?
Katara: (still not looking up) Nope. Have fun.
Aang: (crossing his arms peevishly) I will.
Katara: Great.
Aang: I know it's great.
Katara: I'm glad you know.
Aang: I'm glad you're glad.
Katara: Good!
Aang: Fine!

(Aang turns to storm angrily out of the room. He pauses at the door and turns his head back to look at Katara. She is still intent on her waterbending and does not look up at him. His face falls and he walks out the door. Just as he is off camera, Katara lets the water fall back into the bowl, crosses her arms, and looks at the door through which Aang has just exited.)

(Scene cuts back to the dojo. Suki and Sokka are circling each other with fans unfurled.)

Suki: You're not going to master it in one day. Even I'm not that good.
Sokka: (slightly losing his balance) I think I'm starting to get it.

(Sokka continues to practice the moves, and at the end of the set he accidentally throws his fan out the door and into a tree. Suki looks out the door at the lost fan as snow falls from the branches above to bury it.)

Suki: (turning and walking towards Sokka) It's not about strength. Our technique is about using your opponents' force against them. Loosen up. Think of the fan as an extension of your arm. (Suki assumes the battle stance. The camera changes to an intense close up of Sokka's determined face.) Wait for an opening and then...

(Suki lunges at Sokka and he parries the thrust, knocking her off her feet. She shows her surprise and embarrassment as she looks up from her spot on the floor.)

Sokka: (crossing his arms in a "so there" manner) Hmm...
Suki: (getting to her feet, flustered) I fell on purpose to make you feel better!
Sokka: (laughing and pointing his finger at her) I got you! Admit I got you!
Suki: (laughing as she grabs Sokka's outstretched hand and bends it back painfully) Okay, it was a lucky shot. Let's see if you can do it again.

(Suki lets Sokka's hand go and they assume battle positions. They begin to circle each other. Scene cuts to Aang in the middle of the bay looking towards shore at his fan club. On closer inspection, all of the girls sitting on shore appear to be very bored.)

Koko: (impatiently) What's taking so long?
Aang: I'm sure it will be here any second! (He looks down at the water.) What about this? (Aang suspends and spins the marble between his two hands.)
Little Girl: Not that again. Boring.
Koko: Where's the unagi? It's getting late.

(The girls begin to get up and leave. Camera view changes to a close up of Aang alone in the water as he shouts and waves to the girls.)

Aang: Where're you going? Don't leave!
Koko: Sorry, Aang! Maybe next time.

(As the last of the girls leaves, Katara walks onto the beach.)

Aang: (excitedly waving) Katara! You came!
Katara: I wanted to make sure you were safe. You really had me worried.
Aang: Back there you acted like you didn't care.
Katara: I'm sorry.

Aang: Me too. I did let all that attention go to my head. I was being a jerk.

Katara: (affectionately) Well, get out of the water before you catch a cold, you big jerk!

Aang: (grinning widely as he begins to swim toward shore) On my way!

(As Aang swims towards land, the unagi comes up behind him and catches him in its wake. As the unagi rises from the water, Aang is kneeling on a portion of its tail. Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(The unagi raises its head and spews a powerful jet of water directly at Aang. He leaps up and grabs hold of one of the unagi's whiskers. The unagi shakes its head back and forth in an attempt to dislodge Aang. POV changes to a shot from inside the unagi's mouth as Aang swings back and forth in front of the sharp fangs. Saliva drips from the unagi's teeth and it wets its lips with its tongue.)

Katara: (calling from the shore) Hang on, Aang!

(The unagi continues to shake its head and Aang is thrown into the water. He is unconscious as he comes to the surface. Both the unagi and Katara rush towards him. Katara reaches Aang first and takes him into her arms just as the unagi raises itself from the water. She pushes the water forcefully in front of her and propels both herself and Aang away from the unagi. The unagi dives into the water and the force of its dive sends Aang and Katara flying into a small cavern. Angrily, the unagi shoots water from its mouth and eventually sinks back into the bay. Katara peers over the side of the opening and sees Prince Zuko's ship approaching the island.)

Katara: Zuko!

(Zuko's ship lands. The prow is let down and Zuko rides out of the hull on the back of a war rhinoceros. He is accompanied by many men also on on rhino mounts.

Zuko: I want the Avatar alive.

(Katara hides Aang in the cave as Zuko and his army march towards Kyoshi. Aang is still unconscious.)

Katara: Wake up, Aang!

(Katara moves her hands up Aang's chest and draws the water out of his lungs. Aang coughs and sputters.)

Aang: (weakly) Katara... don't ride the unagi. Not fun.

(Scene cuts to the warrior's dojo. Suki and Sokka are sparring. He parries a thrust and they both smile.)

Suki: Not bad.

(Oyagi runs to the door of the dojo, breathless.)

Oyagi: Firebenders have landed on our shores! Girls, come quickly!
Sokka: Hey, I'm not a... oh, whatever!

(Scene cuts to Zuko entering the town. The streets are deserted. The camera pans from the far end of town to a close up of Zuko's face.)

Zuko: Come out, Avatar! You can't hide from me forever! (to his men) Find him.

(Zuko's army begins to search the town for Aang. The camera follows the three war rhinos as they proceed down the main street of the village. Scene cuts to a close up of an unfurling fan. Scene cuts again to a long distance shot of the firebenders continuing down the street.)

(A green form rushes silently past the camera. The fan warriors attack Zuko's army. Suki heads directly for Zuko. As she is about to land on him, he turns his rhinoceros and she is swatted out of the air by its tail. As she hits the ground, Zuko aims a fire blast at her. Sokka steps in between Suki and the fire ball, deflecting it. Zuko, taken by surprise, falls off his rhinoceros.)

Sokka: I guess training's over.

(Suki, Sokka, and another warrior cautiously approach the prone Zuko. Zuko spins around on his hands shooting fire bolts out of his feet at the approaching warriors. He knocks them all to the ground and pulls himself to his feet. Zuko leaps to the middle of the street.)

Zuko: Nice try, Avatar! But these little girls can't save you.
Aang: Hey! Over here!
Zuko: Finally!

(Zuko and Aang face each other, "High Noon" style. Zuko lets loose three consecutive fire balls from his hands. Aang dodges them and, using his staff as a helicopter, flies toward Zuko. Zuko shoots another blast of fire, which knocks Aang's staff out of his hands. Aang leaps away and picks up two discarded fans. Zuko runs full force at Aang. Aang uses the fans to throw an enormous gust of air at Zuko. The air knocks Zuko through the wall of a building. Aang drops the fans and picks up his staff. He throws it into the air and flies over the now burning town. He looks behind him to see the statue of Avatar Kyoshi engulfed in flames. He lands next to Katara, who is helping a small child inside.)

Katara: Get inside.
Aang: (upset) Look what I brought to this place.
Katara: It's not your fault.
Aang: Yes, it is. These people got their town destroyed trying to protect me.
Katara: Then let's get out of here. Zuko will leave Kyoshi to follow us. I know it feels wrong to run, but I think it's the only way.
Aang: (hanging his head) I'll call Appa.

(Scene cuts to a fan warrior battling a firebender. She throws her fan directly at his face mask and knocks him unconscious. Scene cuts again to Sokka and Suki crouching behind a house.)

Suki: There's no time to say goodbye.
Sokka: What about, "I'm sorry"?
Suki: For what?
Sokka: I treated you like a girl when I should have treated you like a warrior.
Suki: (leaning towards Sokka) I am a warrior. (She kisses him on the cheek.) But I'm a girl, too. (Sokka touches his hand to his cheek, his eyes wide with surprise, and blushes.) Now get out of here! We'll hold them off.

(Sokka runs up Appa's tail. Katara, Aang, and Momo are waiting for him.)

Aang: Appa, yip yip!

(Appa grunts and flies out of the town. Zuko sees them leaving.)

Zuko: (to his men) Back to the ship! Don't lose sight of them!

(Camera view changes to Appa flying away from the burning town. Katara and Sokka are sitting in the saddle on Appa's back. Aang is sitting behind Appa's head with the reins in his hands. His head is hanging down; he is clearly upset. Katara leans forward to speak to him.)

Katara: I know it's hard, but you did the right thing. Zuko would have destroyed the whole place if we had stayed. They're going to be okay, Aang.

(Without a word, Aang suddenly dives off of Appa's head into the bay, a determined expression on his face.)

Katara: (as he dives off) What are you doing?!

(Katara and Sokka watch in horror as Aang disappears under the water. A close up of the water's surface shows concentric rings Aang's dive has created. Several seconds go by before the unagi bursts out of the water, Aang riding on it. He has hold of both whiskers and forces the unagi's head towards the burning town of Kyoshi. Aang pulls back on the whiskers and the unagi spews water over the town. The stream continues long enough to put out the fires Zuko and his army had begun. A closer shot of the town shows it is now only smoldering. Camera switches to a shot of Zuko and his now very wet army and then a close up of a very unhappy Zuko.)

(Scene cuts to Aang on the back of the unagi. He sees that Kyoshi is out of danger and lets go of the unagi's whiskers. The unagi rears its head and Aang jumps into the air just as Appa swoops down. Appa catches Aang in his front paws and flies off. Scene cuts to Oyagi looking at the departing travelers through a window.)

Oyagi: (gratefully) Thank you, Avatar.

(Scene cuts to Aang climbing into Appa's saddle. Katara, Sokka, and Momo are sitting, waiting for him.)

Aang: (clearly expecting a lecture from Katara) I know, I know. That was stupid and dangerous.
Katara: Yes, it was.

(Katara hugs Aang. Aang's face lights up with joy and surprise. Scene changes to the fin of the unagi swimming in the bay. The sun is setting. All is calm and quiet. Fade to black.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Scene opens with a shot of partially snow covered ground. The shot pans up to reveal the Katara, Aang, Sokka and Appa mounting the crest of a small hill. Aang smiles and spreads his arms wide.)

Aang: The Earth Kingdom city of Omashu!

(Cut during Aang's statement to a wide shot of the valley in front of them. A walled city rests atop a huge rock promontory and is accessible only by a narrow, switchback road. The city looks both impressive and impregnable. Cut back to the group.)

Aang: I used to always come here to visit my friend, Bumi.
Katara: Wow. We don't have cities like this in the South Pole.
Sokka (in amazement): They have buildings here that don't melt!
Aang: Well, let's go slow pokes! The real fun is inside the city!

(Aang launches himself into the air and lands farther down the hill.)

Katara: Wait, Aang! It could be dangerous if people find out you're the Avatar.
Sokka: You need a disguise.
Aang: So, what am I supposed to do? Grow a mustache?

(Cut to Aang wearing a huge fake head of hair and mustache made out of some of Appa's hair. He is scratching underneath the wig.)

Aang: Ohh, this is so itchy! (To Appa) How do you live in this stuff? (Appa grunts at him in response.)
Sokka: Great! Now you look just like my grandfather.
Katara: Technically, Aang is 112 years old.
Aang (picking up his staff and using a fake, old man voice): Now let's get to skippin', young whippersnappers! The big city awaits.

(Aang begins to walk hunched over, using his staff as a walking stick. Fade to a shot sometime later of the three walking up the access road.)

Aang: You guys are gonna love Omashu. The people here are the friendliest in the world.

(From o.c. a rough voice is heard. The three stop short at the sound, and the shot cuts a moment later to a view of the city gate just up ahead. A merchant is trying to get into the city, but the three guards are giving him trouble.)

Gate Guard: Rotten cabbages! What kind of slum do you think this is?

(Cut to a closer shot of the guards and the merchant. The guard is holding one of the offending cabbages. He crushes the cabbage in his hand, knocks those in the merchant's arms over the side of the access road. The guard then earthbends a lump of the ground, knocking the merchant's cabbage cart high into the air and over the side of the access road. The cart and all the merchant's cabbages plunge hundreds of feet to the valley floor below.)

Cabbage Merchant: Noo! My cabbages!

(The merchant looks over the side of the road as he laments. The camera pans left to our group as they look over as well. Cut to the three now looking ahead to the gate with some trepidation.)

Aang: Just keep smiling...

(Aang walks forward with a big smile. Katara titters uneasily, but she and Sokka follow. The guard who has just obliterated the cart walks forward to meet Aang. He earthbends a huge boulder out of the ground and holds it over Aang's head.)

Gate Guard: State your business!

(Aang rushes forward out from under the rock in a move much too sprightly for his supposed age. He points an accusing finger at the guard and using his old man voice begins to speak.)

Aang: My business is my business, young man, and none of yours! I've got half a mind to bend you over my knee and paddle your backside!

(The guard drops the stone behind Aang in surprise. Cut to view of Katara and Sokka, both terrified at what Aang is doing.)

Gate Guard: Settle down, old timer. Just tell me who you are.
Aang: Name's Bonzu Pipinpadaloxicopolis, the Third, and these are my grandkids.
Katara (now smiling serenely): Hi, June Pipinpadaloxicopolis. Nice to meet you.
Gate Guard (pointing to Katara): You seem like a responsible young lady. See that your grandfather stays out of trouble. Enjoy Omashu!
Katara: We will.

(The guard motions them to pass. The three walk forward into the city with Sokka trailing.)

Gate Guard: Wait a minute! (He grabs Sokka by the shoulder just after he passes.) You're a strong young boy. Show some respect for the elderly and carry your grandfather's bag.
Aang: Good idea!

(Aang throws bag to Sokka. Cut to a rear shot of the three at the gate, which is stone and consists of three movable, interlocking stone walls. The three are shocked by the size and power of this fortification. The gates begin to close again as the three move to pass through it. Just as his vision of Aang is obscured, the guard sees Momo's ears emerge from Aang's wig. Cut to a shot of three inside the gate and looking over a railing at the interior of the city. The shot pans up to reveal many houses with roofs painted in Earth Kingdom green. There are chutes all over the city with crates and packages sliding along them. While Aang is speaking, the view cuts to images of earthbenders working the delivery system as Aang explains the mechanics of the system to Katara and Sokka o.c.)

Aang: This is the Omashu delivery system. Miles and miles of tubes and chutes. Earthbending brings the packages up and gravity brings them down. (Cut back to the group.)
Sokka: Great, so they get their mail on time.
Aang: They do get their mail on time, but my friend Bumi found a better use for these chutes...

(Aang smiles mischievously, looking slightly o.c. Fade to a flashback scene. A young boy with spiky orange hair tied with a headband looks out over the city. Aang's torso appears on the left side of the screen and the boy turns to face him. The boy, Bumi, has a missing tooth and a slightly insane facial expression.)

Bumi: Look around you, what do you see?
Aang: Umm... the mail system?
Bumi (conspiratorially): Instead of seeing what they want you to see, you gotta open your brain to the possibilities.
Aang: A package sending system?
Bumi: The world's greatest super slide!

(Cut to a wide shot of the top of the chute they are looking at. The shot expands to show that is does look like a huge slide. Cut back to the pair.)

Aang: Bumi, you're a mad genius!

(Cut to Bumi, who smiles widely, laughs and snorts. Cut to Aang and Bumi in one of the transport bins rocketing down the slide. The flashback ends, but it is clear that Aang, Katara and Sokka are now at the same place in the city where the flashback occurred. The view pans up to the top of the slide where the three are now sitting one of the transport bins, teetering. Aang is excited, the other two are leery.)

Aang: One ride, then we're off to the North Pole, Airbender's honor.
Katara: This sounded like fun at first, but now that I'm here, I'm starting to have second thoughts!

(As Katara finishes her sentence the view cuts to an overhead shot that shows the initial vertical drop. It is intimidating. As she finishes, the bin drops into the chute and they rocket away. As the accelerate down the chute, a neighboring chute becomes visible in the background. It is clearly going to merge with the chute our group is in. A rack of spears is dropping down this other chute and after the two paths merge, Sokka is soon ducking to avoid getting killed. Katara and Sokka start making distressed noises as they try and avoid the spears.)

Aang: I'm on it! I'm on it!

(Aang starts rocking the bin back and forth in the chute. He soon derails them out of the chute and their bin freefalls onto a rooftop below. Cut to a view of a group of Earth Kingdom soldier being addressed by an officer.)

Officer: Men, you'll be going off to combat soon. It's important that you be prepared for anything.

(At this moment, the bin with our group falls into view, shocking the audience. The frame stops with the accompanying sound effect of an egg-timer going off.. Aang has grabbed the front of the bin and is apparently trying to pull it up, his foot in Katara's face. Sokka is panicking in the back. The frame rate speeds up again as Aang airbends to propel the bin back into the air and out of the screen. Within a shot or two they have managed to drop back into a chute and are rocketing down once again.)

Katara: Aang, do something! Use your airbending!
Aang: Yeh! Good idea! That'll make us go even faster!

(Aang blasts air behind them, making them speed up. Cut to city dwellers looking at them in alarm as they whiz by down the chute. As they approach the drop down of the last major chute, they all screen as they see the off-load point just in front of them. The off-load has a package on it that they will hit. An earthbender next to it moves the package. Cut to the kids, who breathe a sigh of relief. Cut back to the earthbender, who raises another package into the off-load point. Cut back to the kids, who scream again. Rather than hit the package, they hit the side of the trench and run off the track again. They all fall out of the bin and are falling, but Aang airbends them each back into the bin. They bounce off a roof and into a man's work room, destroying his pottery. They bounce of his floor and out the window opposite the one they came in.)

Aang: Sorry!

(They drop into someone's living room and fly through their house. Outside they crash through the wall of the balcony and drop again, screaming. Cut to the merchant from the earlier scene, fondly shaking one of his cabbages. The sound of a bomb falling is heard. He looks up and jumps back as the bin and the kids fall onto the cabbage cart, totally destroying it, blowing cabbages all over the place. The kids land in a heap and Aang's disguise is now gone.)

Cabbage Merchant: My cabbages! You're gonna pay for this!

(The three are quickly surrounded by soldiers.)

Aang (sheepishly): Two cabbages please.

(Fade to scene of King Bumi's throne chamber. It is decorated in shades of Earth Kingdom green. The aged King sits on his throne in the distance, for it is a large room. Cut to the King, who wears the same crazy expression as in Aang's flashback, though he is now clearly ancient. The King looks upon the three, and the guards behind them force them to kneel.)

King Bumi: Mmm?
Guard: Your majesty, these juveniles were arrested for vandalism, traveling under false pretenses and malicious destruction of cabbages.

(Screen pans right to reveal the irate cabbage dealer.)

Cabbage Merchant: Off with their heads! One for each head of cabbage!
Guard: Silence! Only the King can pass down judgment. What is your judgment, Sire?

(Close up of King Bumi. He looks at each in turn. Sokka is nervous, Katara hopeful, and Aang tries to act like he's invisible.)

King Bumi: Throw them... a feast!

(Guards make noises of surprise, the merchant of chagrin. Carnival music plays in the background.)

Aang: Huh?

(Fade to a table loaded with food, camera pans right. Momo eats goodies on the right side of the table. Cut to the three seated, with Aang in the middle. Behind them King Bumi stands.)

King Bumi: Heheh! The people in my city have gotten fat from too many feasts, so I hope you like your chicken with no skin.
Aang: Thanks, but I don't eat meat.
King Bumi (to Sokka): How about you? I bet you like meat. (He sticks the drumstick in Sokka's mouth.)
Sokka (chewing): Mmm!
Katara (to Aang): Is it just me, or is this guy's crown a little crooked?

(She makes cukoo motions at the side of her head as she says the latter. Cut to King Bumi moving to take his seat at the opposite end of the table.)

King Bumi: So, tell me young bald one. Where are you from?
Aang: I'm from... Kangaroo Island.
King Bumi: Oh, Kangaroo Island, eh? I hear that place is really hoppin!

(Cut to the three. Silence is broken by Sokka's laughter, the other two look at him like he has grown a third head.)

Sokka: What? It was pretty funny.
King Bumi (yawns): Well, all these good jokes are making me tired. Guess it's time to the hay.

(As he ends his sentence, he suddenly throws another drumstick at Aang, who airbends it to a standstill, though he is very surprised. It spins in the air in front of him. The guards draw breath in surprise.)

King Bumi: There's an airbender in our presence and not just any airbender, the Avatar! (He stands. Aang drops the drumstick, trying to act like he did not just reveal himself.) Now what do you have to say for yourself, Mr. Pipinpadaloxicopolis?



Act II

(Long shot of the city, cut back to the feast table. Aang stands and spreads his arms wide in a gesture of defeat.)

Aang: Okay! You caught me. I'm the Avatar, doing my Avatar thing, keeping the world safe. Everything checks out (looks under the table), no firebenders here. So, good work everybody. (Puts his arms around his companions and together they stand.) Love each other, respect all life and don't run with your spears. We'll see you next time!

(The three have been walking backwards to the door, but the guards stop them. The shot widens to show the back of King Bumi in the foreground looking at them.)

Katara: You can't keep us here. Let us leave.
King Bumi: Lettuce leaf?

(He picks up a lettuce leaf from the plate in front of him and takes a bite. Cut to the three as Sokka leans over to speak in a low voice to the others. The carnival music has begun to play in the background.)

Sokka: We're in serious trouble. This guy is nuts.
King Bumi (now very serious, the music stops): Tomorrow the Avatar will face three deadly challenges. But for now, the guards will show you to your chamber.
Guard: My liege, do you mean the good chamber, or the bad chamber?
King Bumi: The newly refurbished chamber.
Guard: Wait, which one are we talking about?
King Bumi: The one that used to be the bad chamber, until the recent refurbishing that is. Of course, we've been calling it the new chamber, but we really should number them. Uh, take them to the refurbished chamber that was once bad!

(Cut to the three being led out by guards, then a close up of King Bumi looking mad and chomping on lettuce. Cut to a wall that is torn open by earthbending. The three are thrust in and the “door” is closed by earthebending. The chamber is beautiful, spacious and furnished with three comfortable beds.)

Katara: This is a prison cell? But it's so nice.
Aang: He did say it was newly refurbished.
Sokka: Nice or not, we're still prisoners.
Aang: I wonder what these challenges are gonna be.
Katara: We're not sticking around to find out. There's gotta be some way outta here.
Aang (smiling and pointing o.c.): The air vents!
Sokka: If you think we're gonna fit through there then you're crazier then that king.

(Cut to view of the air vent. It is a small circular hole in the wall.)

Aang: We can't, but Momo can.

(Cut to view of Momo sprawled on the bed, gorged on an apple, his tongue still licking the fruit. The shot expands to show Aang entering from the right.)

Aang: Momo, I need you to find Appa and bust us outta here!

(Camera switches to a view from inside the air vent. The light from the room is blocked as Aang stuffs Momo face first into the vent. Soon Momo's face is right up against the camera. Cut to shot of Aang stuffing the little animal into the vent and having some trouble.)

Aang: Go on, boy, get Appa!

(He stops, only to have Momo's behind dangle from the vent. He is stuck.)

Sokka: Eh, how was Appa supposed to save us anyway?
Aang (from o.c., as Momo tries to free himself, but fails): Appa is a ten ton flying bison, I think he could figure something out.
Katara: Well, no point in arguing about it now. (She gets in a bed.) Get some rest, Aang. Looks like you'll need it for tomorrow.

(Aang walks dejectedly over to the last unoccupied bed. Fade to a shot of Aang asleep, snoring loudly. The room shakes as an earthbender opens the “door.” Aang opens his eyes to see the other beds empty.)

Aang: Sokka! Katara! (Turning to guards) Where are my friends?
Guard: The King will free them if you complete your challenges.
Aang: And if I fail?
Guard: He didn't say. Your staff please?

(Aang gives the staff to the guard. Cut to Aang entering the throne room flanked by two guards. King Bumi's torso appears on the left side of the screen. He is wearing a horrible, blue, purple and light green robe.)

King Bumi: First, Avatar, what do you think of my new outfit? I want your honest opinion.

(Cut to Aang who has no reaction. A cough is heard in the background. Cut back to the King.)

King Bumi: I'm waiting.
Aang: I... guess it's fine.
King Bumi: Excellent! You passed the first test.
Aang: Really?
King Bumi (thinking): Well, not one of the deadly tests. The real challenges are much more... challenging.

(Aang's expression becomes angry. He airbends his feet to run in an instant up to King Bumi.)

Aang: I don't have time for your crazy games! Gimme my friends back! We're leaving!
King Bumi: Ohh, I thought you might refuse...

(Cut to a shot with the King on the left, Aang on the right, and a view of the wall of the chamber between them. At this moment a “door' is opened by guards holding Katara and Sokka in the corridor beyond. The guards place small rings on one of their fingers which contract to fit snugly as soon as they are worn. Sokka and Katara struggle to take off the rings, but can't.)

King Bumi: ...so I will give your friends some special souvenirs. Those delightful rings are made of pure genemite, also known as creeping crystal. It's crystal that grows remarkably fast. By nightfall your friends will be completely covered in it. Terrible fate, really. I can stop it, but only if you cooperate.

(Close up of the ring on Sokka's finger. It grows in front of the camera. Cut to Sokka's face.)

Sokka: Ah! It's already creeping!
Aang (to King Bumi): I'll do as you want.
King Bumi (grinning evilly): Mmm!

(Fade to new scene of a cavern. Camera pans left to reveal Aang standing on a small stone parapet with a waterfall in the background. The cavern floor is covered in stalagmites. In the upper left corner of the screen, King Bumi, the guards and the prisoners stand on a balcony. Crystal already covers the forearms of both. King Bumi laughs.)

King Bumi: It seems I've lost my lunch box key and I'm hungry.

(Cut to a close up shot of a key hanging by a long chain in the middle of the waterfall. A ladder reaches up from the ground of the cavern to about where the key dangles.)

King Bumi: Ooo, there it is. Would you mind fetching it for me?

(Aang jumps into action. Using his airbending skills he bouces from stalagmite to stalagmite. He charges into the waterfall, holding his breath, and begins to climb the ladder. The force of the water stops him from making progress, though.)

King Bumi: Ooo, climbing the ladder. No one's thought of that before.

(Aang loses his grip and is shot out of the waterfall. He is about to get impaled when he recovers and slides between two stalagmites, one foot on the side of each. He breathes a sigh of relief. He looks up at his friends and regains his determination. This time he flies up to the stalactites on the ceiling and is soon looking down at the key. He concentrates, jumps into the waterfall, and is shot right back out, managing to grab onto a stalagmite. Cut to King Bumi and the prisoners. The crystal now covers them up to the shoulder.)

King Bumi: That's right. Keep diving head in, I'm sure it'll work eventually.

(This gives Aang an idea. He breaks off the top of the stalagmite he is holding and throws it at the chain holding the key. Using his airbending skills he makes sure it breaks the chain and carries the bottom part of it along with the key up to the balcony. The tip of the stalagmite embeds itself like a spearhead into the top of the doorway. The key now dangles just over the surprised King's head.)

Aang: There, enjoy your lunch! I want my friends back, now!
King Bumi: Uh, not yet. I need help with another matter. It seems I've lost my pet Flopsy.

(Cut to a fluffy bunny sitting on a rock. The scene expands to show Aang landing in the background.)

Aang: Okay, found him!

(The view expands again to reveal Aang and the bunny in the middle of a shallow arena. King Bumi and the prisoners are at the railing around the top of the arena.)

King Bumi: Bring him to me! Daddy wants a kiss from Flopsy!

(Cut to Aang and Flopsy. Behind Aang a huge monster is landing.)

Aang: Come here, Flopsy!

(Aang turns around to face the monster while the bunny squeaks and runs off. The monster crushes a huge boulder in front of Aang. He flips backwards and lands as the bunny runs by him, squealing in terror.)

Aang: Flopsy, wait! Flopsy! Flopsy!

(Aang chases the bunny while the monster chases Aang. Cut to King Bumi, who is cackling maniacally. The bunny runs into a rabbit hole in the wall of the arena. Aang slides up next to it and sticks his hand in the hole. He rummages around, but finds nothing. Meanwhile, the monster closes in. Aang has another idea. He stands up and faces the monster just as it arrives.)

Aang (to monster): Flopsy?

(The monster stops instantly and wags its tail. Flopsy picks Aang up tenderly, making gentle noises. Aang is surprised and starts screaming. He stops when Flopsy gives him a huge lick.)

Aang: Flopsy!

(He rubs Flopsy's head. Flopsy's drops Aang and scales the arena wall in response to King Bumi's o.c. whistling and kissing noises. He flops on back in front of King Bumi. Carnival music begins to play.)

King Bumi: Awww, that's a good boy! Yes, who has a soft belly?

(He begins to rub Flopsy's belly. Flopsy's left leg paws the ground in pleasure. Cut to Aang jumping up onto the railing of the arena. Katara is in the foreground, covered from head to ankle in crystal. The carnival music stops.)

Aang: Guys, are you ok?
Katara: Other than the crystal slowly encasing my entire body, doing great.

(Camera pans right to Sokka who is in similar straits. A new length of crystal grows on the left side of Sokka's head. He loses his balance and keels over. Cut to King Bumi rubbing Flopsy's belly.)

King Bumi: Awww, yes.
Aang (looking severe): Come on. I'm ready for the next challenge.
King Bumi: Ahh! Hahaha!

(Fade to next scene with King Bumi still laughing maniacally o.c. The new scene is of an earthbending arena. It is ill-lit and largely featureless except the dirt floor. Cut to two balconies, Aang and King Bumi on one, the prisoners, now encased in crystal except for their faces and feet, on the other.)

King Bumi: Your final test is a duel and as a special treat you may choose your opponent. Point and choose.

(Two enormous gladiator type characters show up to flank King Bumi. The champion on the left is a muscular man with a nasty smile and a huge axe. The champion on the right is a mammoth fighter whoe looks like he relies upon brute strength. Aang is terrified.)

Aang (thinking): So, you're saying whoever I point to, that's the person I get to fight?
King Bumi: Choose wisely.

(Cut to Aang's p.o.v. as the camera ranges between the King and the two champions.)

Aang: I... choose... you! (He is pointing at King Bumi.)
King Bumi: Haha! Wrong choice!

(King Bumi, with some effort, corrects his lumped posture. He dumps his robes to reveal a surprisingly muscular physique for such an old man. He is clearly formidable and Aang recoils, realizing his mistake. The King is also apparently a master earthbender, for he immediately stamps the ground, blowing Aang far out into the arena. He lands in the dust. King Bumi launches himself off the balcony and lands close to Aang. He laughs evilly as the scene cuts to commercial break.)



Act III

(Return to a long shot of the arena. Cut to King Bumi staring Aang down.)

King Bumi: You thought I was a frail old man, but I'm the most powerful earthbender you'll ever see.
Aang: Can I fight the guy with the axe instead?
King Bumi: There are no ‘take-back-sees' in my kingdom. You might need this!

(King Bumi motions to a guard who throws Aang his staff. King Bumi immediately launches several boulders at him which Aang dodges.)

King Bumi: Typical airbender tactic: avoid and evade. I'd hoped the Avatar would be less predictable.

(He launches another boulder at Aang, who dodges and launches himself into the air.)

King Bumi: Don't you have any surprises for me? Sooner or later, you'll have to strike back.

(The King launches another stone at Aang which misses, but explodes upon impacting the ceiling of the arena. The debris knocks Aang to the ground and he loses his staff as he falls. Aang gets back up as King Bumi begins walking around. With each turn he makes a huge pillar of rock block Aang's path. One of them catches Aang in the gut as it rises into the air.)

King Bumi: Oh, you'll have to be a little more creative than that!

(Aang jumps off the pillar, riding one of his famous airballs. He rides the wall of the arena and approaches the King from his right. He launches a huge gale at his opponent, who blocks it with a sheet of stone raised from the floor of the arena. Cut to the King emerging from behind the stone shield, a smile on his face. The carnival music plays again.)

King Bumi: Did someone leave the windows open? It feels a little drafty in here! (Screen zooms to a close up of the King, who drops his smile.) Are you hoping I'll catch a cold?

(Cut to Aang dropping off his airball and a quick cut back to the King, who kicks over the stone sheet and begins to raise it on earth dug out of the arena's surface. He shoots the earth underneath the stone sheet at Aang which knocks him over. The King strikes the ground with his fist, sending a shock wave through the arena surface right at Aang. The Avatar flips backwards and avoids the shock wave, but now is close to the rear wall of the arena.)

King Bumi: How are you going to going to get me from way over there?

(Aang looks determined and begins to run to his opponent. Cut to King Bumi who uses the side of his foot to dash the earth. The ground around Aang becomes quicksand and he falls in. The King raises two boulders and sends them to smash the struggling Aang. He escapes just in time as the rocks smash together. Aang jumps straight at his opponent, unleashing a blast of wind that knocks him and the stone sheet he stands upon back against the wall of the arena. The King raises one of the boulders from where he had just failed to crush Aang and pulled it back towards him at frightening speed. The Avatar sees it just in time and does a backflip that barely allows him to get up and over the flying boulder. The boulder of course moves on to almost crush the King, but he breaks it into many pieces as it reaches him. With tremendous effort, King Bumi tears the entire gate area of the arena out of the ground and holds it over his head. Aang screams in terror and begins to run in circles, creating a tornado. The King throws the massive earth mound, but the tornado grabs it and throws it back at him. As it reaches King Bumi he bisects it neatly in two. Aang appears between the rock pieces and pins the King with his staff. The King smiles and looks up. Cut to Aang who also looks up as a little piece of rock bounces off his head. Overhead hovers one of the two halves of rock, ready to crush them both.)

King Bumi: Hehe! Well done, Avatar. You fight with much fire in your heart.

(The King throws the rock to the side of the arena. He then falls backwards into the floor, disappearing and leaving a Bumi shaped hole. Aang is flabbergasted.)

Aang: Huh?

(Cut to the prisoners. A hole opens up in the floor of the balcony and the King emerges, the hole closing instantly beneath him. Aang, using his staff as a helicopter blade, lands on the balcony.)

King Bumi: You've passed all my tests. Now, you must answer one question.
Aang: That's not fair! You said you would release my friends if I finished your tests.
King Bumi: Oh, but what's the point of tests if you don't learn anything?
Sokka: Oh come on!
King Bumi: Answer this one question and I will set your friends free. (Cut to a close up of King Bumi's face) What... is my name? (Cut to Aang, who does not have a ready answer.) From the looks of your friends, I'd say you only have a few minutes. (Exit King Bumi.)
Aang: How am I supposed to know his name?
Katara: Think about the challenges, maybe it's some kind of riddle.
Sokka: I got it!
Aang: Yeh?
Sokka: He's an earthbender, right? Rocky! (Silence, followed by a cough in the background.) You know, because of all the rocks?
Katara: We're gonna keep trying, but that is a good backup.
Aang: Okay, so back to the challenges. I got a key from the waterfall. I saved his pet and I had a duel.
Katara: And what did you learn?
Aang: Well, everything was different than I expected.
Katara (a piece of crystal growing into her cheek): And...?
Aang: Well, they weren't straightforward. To solve each test, I had to think differently than I usually would. (Realization sweeping his features.) I know his name!

(Fade to the King's throne room. Aang and the King stand opposite each other. King Bumi is once again hunched over and in his regular green robes.)

Aang: I solved the question the same way I solved the challenges. As you said a long time ago, I had to open my brain to the possibilities. (Cut King Bumi, who begins to laugh and snort, just as the younger version had in the flashback.) Bumi, you're a mad genius! (He runs and hugs the old King.)
King Bumi: Oh, Aang. It's good to see you. You haven't changed a bit. Literally.

(Aang's old friend rubs Aang's head. Katara and Sokka approach from the left side of the screen, still encased in crystal. Cut to Katara's face, which is now all that is visible.)

Katara: Uh, over here!

(Pan to Sokka's mouth, which is all that is visible of him.)

Sokka: Little help?

(Cut to the King and Aang, the former of which makes a pulling back gesture with a fist, shattering the crystal from around both water tribe members. Crystal flies all over and King Bumi catches a piece.)

King Bumi: Genemite is made of rock candy. (He takes a bite). Delicious!
Katara: So this crazy king is your old friend, Bumi?
King Bumi (annoyed): Who you calling old? (Pause.) Okay. I'm old.
Sokka: Why did you do all this instead of just telling Aang who you were?
King Bumi: First of all, it's pretty fun messing with people, hehe (snort! snort!), but I do have a reason. (Turning to Aang). Aang, you have a difficult task ahead. The world has changed in the hundred years you've been gone. It's the duty of the Avatar to restore balance to the world by defeating Fire Lord Ozai. You have much to learn. You must master the four elements and confront the Fire Lord, and when you do, I hope you will think like a mad genius! (Cut to Aang, who smiles, clasps his hands together in thanks, and bows.) And it looks like you're in good hands. You'll need your friends to help defeat the Fire Nation. (Momo jumps onto Aang's shoulder.) And you'll need Momo too.
Aang: Thank you for your wisdom. But before we leave, I have a challenge for you!

(Cut to a shot of the city. Pan right to reveal a chute. A moment later a delivery bin flies by, King Bumi at the front, Aang in the back. Both are having a blast as the air rushes by them. Cut to long shot of the city where a plume of dust and smoke rises after an impact sound is heard.)

Cabbage Merchant (in anguish): My cabbages!



[End Credits]
Act I

(The scene opens with a view of a forest canopy. The camera pans down to reveal Aang and Katara sitting on a natural stone patio. A noisy little stream exits the ground from underneath the stone ledge. Katara is folding her sleeping bag while Aang lies back in the exposed roots of an overturned tree. Cut to a view from behind Katara to see Sokka walking up the stream path. He is holding a sack.)

Aang: Great, you're back! What's for dinner?
Sokka: We've got a few options. First, round nuts and some kind of oval shaped nuts, and some rock shaped nuts that... might just be rocks. Dig in!

(Sokka throws one of the nuts that might be a rock over his shoulder. It lands near Momo. Aang and Katara look at each other then back at Sokka.)

Katara: Seriously, what else ya got?

(Sokka peers with one eye into the bag, hoping to find something else. Cut to Momo, eyeing the nut like object with suspicion. He chitters and picks it up. He taps it on a nearby stone to no effect. The he cocks back and raps it hard on the stone. At that moment, a huge, startling noise disrupts the forest's calm. Cut to a wide shot of the ledge and a clearing to the right where Appa was resting. The group and Appa look up at the noise.)

Sokka: What was that!?

(Cut to Momo looking befuddled over at Sokka. He turns to look back at the nut like object in his hand. He blinks twice to a cute effect. He drops the nut onto the stone and another huge sound echoes through the forest, startling Momo again. He jumps out of the frame. Cut to another wide shot. The three are looking left o.c. to where Aang points.)

Aang: It's coming from over there!

(Aang and Katara rush off in the direction of the noise, leaving Sokka waving his arms at them.)

Sokka: Shouldn't we run away from huge booms – not toward them?

(Cut to a view of a fallen tree, behind which Aang and Katara appear, followed closely by Sokka. The p.o.v then switches to behind them, where we can see that they are looking down a river bed. The river has been reduced to a small stream. A young earthbender is practicing his art in the river bed, and the three watch him move around a huge boulder. Cut back to a close up of the three.)

Katara: An earthbender!
Aang: Let's go meet him!
Sokka: He looks dangerous, so we better approach cautiously.

(Cut instantly to Katara who has clearly ignored her brother's warning by running way out into the river bed to address the young earthbender.)

Katara: Hello there, I'm Katara! What's your name?

(The young earthbender looks over at Katara in surprise, drops his rock and runs back down the river bed. As he runs, he earthbends a load of rock into the riverbed, blocking pursuit.)

Aang: Nice to meet you!
Katara: We just wanted to say “hi”.
Aang: Hey, that guy's gotta be running somewhere, maybe we're near a village and I bet that village has a market!
Katara (excited): Which means no nuts for dinner! (Aang and Katara run o.c.)
Sokka: Hey! I worked hard to get those nuts! (Momo flies off-screen to join the others, Sokka looks downcast) Yeh, I hate'em too.

(Cut to a few overhead shots of a walled Earth Kingdom village in a steep valley. Cut to Aang, Katara and Sokka in a market. Aang is at a stall trying out a hat.)

Aang: Great hat. I'll trade you some nuts for it.

(Aang turns to Sokka with the hat on and laughs. Meanwhile, Katara has noticed the young earthbender from the river bed enter a nearby building.)

Katara: Hey!

(Katara runs off-screen in pursuit. Cut to the young earthbender in a long, mostly empty room with an older woman, his mother.)

Haru: Hi, mom.
Mother: Where have you been, Haru? You're late! Get started on your chores.

(Katara opens door and enters, framed in sunlight pouring in behind her.)

Katara: Hey, you're that kid! Why did you run away before?
Haru: Uh, you must have me confused with some other kid.

(Aang and Sokka enter.)

Aang: No she doesn't, we saw you earthbending.

(Cut to an exterior shot of the building where the door closes and the windows get shut.)

Mother (hands still on the window she just closed): They saw you doing what?
Haru: They're crazy, mom, I mean, look at how they're dressed!

(All three look at their clothing.)

Mother: You know how dangerous that is! You know what would happen if they caught you earthbending!

(From outside a heavy knock on the door is heard and Sokka quickly parts the window blinds to identify the intruders.)

Soldier (from o.c.): Open up!
Sokka: Fire Nation! Act natural!

(Haru's mother opens the door and a Fire Nation soldier enters. Cut to a view of the others caught freeze-frame in the midst of some very unconvincing “normal” poses. The top of the barrel that Aang is leaning upon shifts and his hand goes into the water up to his shoulder. Cut back to the soldier and Haru's mother.)

Mother: What do you want? I've already paid you this week.
Soldier: The tax just doubled. Wouldn't want an accident, would we?

(The soldier produces a fireball in his hands and smiles. Cut to a wider shot, where everyone takes a step back from the soldier.)

Soldier: Fire is sometimes so hard to control.

(Haru's mother's expression melts from defiance to fear and resignation. Cut to a view of her hands placing a small chest on a table. She opens it to reveal a few miserable coins. She takes most of them out and gives them to the soldier. He dumps the small ones on the ground.)

Soldier: You can keep the copper ones.

(Cut to a long shot of the room, with the soldier exiting in the foreground, the rest clearly visible behind him. They are all unhappy. Haru's mother picks up the copper coins.)

Sokka: Nice guy. How long has the Fire Nation been here?
Mother: Five years. Fire Lord Ozai uses our town's coal mines to fuel his ships.
Haru: They're thugs; they steal from us, and everyone here is too much of a coward to do anything about it.
Mother: Quiet, Haru. Don't talk like that.
Katara: But, Haru's an earthbender, he can help.
Mother: Earthbending is forbidden. It's caused nothing but misery for this village. He must never use his abilities.
Katara: How can you say that? Haru has a gift. Asking him not to earthbend is like asking me not to waterbend. It's a part of who we are.
Mother: You don't understand.
Katara: I understand that Haru can help you fight back. What can the Fire Nation do to you that they haven't done already?
Mother: They could take Haru away! Like they took his father.

(Cut to side view of Haru's face, with a wide-eyed Katara visible in the background. Both look pained. Fade to a view of the surrounding hillsides. It is late afternoon. The view pans right to reveal the outbuildings of a farm. Cut to a view from inside one of these barn like structures. Haru and our group have entered, the open double door visible behind them. The late say sun pours in.)

Haru: My mom said you can sleep here tonight, but you should leave in the morning.
Aang: Thanks. I'll make sure Appa doesn't eat all your hay.

(Quick pan right to reveal Appa with his mouth stuffed with hay. He looks over at Aang, who is o.c., stops chewing for a few seconds. Then begins chewing again. Cut to Haru and Katara leaving the group of buildings, apparently going for a walk.)

Katara: I'm sorry about what I said earlier. I didn't know about your father.
Haru: That's ok. It's funny, the way you were talking back in the store, it reminded me of him.
Katara: thanks.
Haru: My father was very courageous. When the Fire Nation invaded, he and the other earthbenders were outnumbered ten to one, but they fought back anyway.
Katara: He sounds like a great man.
Haru: After the attack, they rounded up my father every other earthbender and took them away. We haven't seen them since.
Katara: So, that's why you hide your earthbending?
Haru: Yeh. The problem is that the only way I can feel close to my father now is when I practice my bending. He taught me everything I know.

(Katara and Haru have now walked up onto the crest of a small hill that overlooks the surrounding countryside. Haru has knelt down and begun twirling some small stones while he speaking about his father. When he is done, he turns the stones to sand, which falls through his fingers. Katara comes up and sits next to him. She points to her necklace and begins to speak.)

Katara: See this necklace? My mother gave it to me.
Haru: It's beautiful.
Katara: I lost my mother in a Fire Nation raid. This necklace is all I have left of her.
Haru: It's not enough, is it?
Katara: No.

(Katara and Haru sit on the hill, the fading glory of the setting sun visible in the space between them. Fade to Katara and Haru walking down a path towards an open mine entrance some way ahead. A boom is heard and rocks and dust come out of the mine entrance. The sound of an old man, probably hurt, can be heard.)

Old Man: Help!
Haru: The mine!

(They both rush to the mine. Cut to the blocked up mine entrance, the old man has almost been buried by the cave in.)

Old Man: Help me!

(The ground still shakes a bit, and more earth threatens to fall on and crush the old man. Katara and Haru enter the view. Haru tries to prevent any more earth falling on the old man by bracing the collapsed mine entrance frame, while Katara tries to get the old man free.)

Katara: (struggling): It's not working, we have to get help.
Haru: There's no time – pull harder.
Katara: Haru, there's a way you can help him.
Haru: I can't.
Katara: Please, there's no one around to see you, it's the only way.

(Indecision dominates Haru's face for a few moments, but then he moves in front of the old man and turns to look back into the min entrance. He concentrates and with a quick move of his hands and feet he pushes the obstruction of earth and stone back deep into the mine, freeing the old man, whom they help get up.)

Katara: Haru, you did it!

(Cut to a night scene. Momo is sitting in the window of the outbuilding on Haru's farm that the group is sleeping in. Cut to a wider shot that shows the group ready for bed and in their sleeping bags. Aang lies over the top of Appa, looking at Katara.)

Katara: It was so brave of Haru to use his earthbending to help that old man.
Aang: You must have really inspired him.
Katara: I guess so.
Sokka: Everyone should get some sleep. We're leaving at dawn.
Katara: Dawn? Can't we sleep in for once?
Sokka: Absolutely not! This village is crawling with Fire Nation troops. If they discover you're here, Aang, we'll be eating fireballs for breakfast. Good night.
Katara (with a sly grin on her face): I'd rather eat fireballs than nuts.
Sokka: Good night.

(Aang and Katara laugh, then Katara blows out their lamp. Cut to an exterior view of their outbuilding which zooms outward, showing the full moon. Clearly some time passes before the next scene, but it is still night. Fire Nation troops walk along a path leading to Haru's farm. Lamps on polls swing back and forth as they march. The soldier who extorted the money from the previous day leads the column. He wears a helmet with horns on either side of his head. He knocks on Haru's house's door three times. The door opens to reveal Haru. He draws an intake of breath in surprise. Cut to a side view of the house, where see Haru on the right, the Fire soldiers on the left, and in between, pointing an accusatory finger at Haru, is the old man saved by Katara and Haru.)

Old Man: That's him! That's the earthbender!

(The solder pushes the old man out of the way and approached Haru. Cut to a frontal shot of Haru with the soldier's hands entering from the side of the frame. He is grabbed and pulled towards the camera, which has the effect of going straight into Haru's pupil. Cut to commercial.)



Act II

(When the show returns we see an overhead shot of Katara exiting the outbuilding. It is dawn. Cut to a closer shot of Katara walking up to a water pump to get some water. She carries a pot which she places under the spout. Rather than wok the pump, however, she gracefully waterbends some water out of the pump and/b into the jar. She picks up the pot and, as she turns to go back to her friends, she notices Haru's mother looking out over the farm. She turns and it is clear she is crying. Katara drops her water pot and it breaks. Katara's eye betray her realization that Haru has been captured. Cut to an interior shot of the outbuilding where the others are packing their gear. The door opens and Katara steps in, tearing at her hair in anguish.)

Katara: They took him! They took Haru away!
Aang: What?
Katara: The old man turned him in to the Fire Nation. It's all my fault, I forced him into earthbending.
Sokka: Slow down, Katara, when did this happen?

(Sokka puts his arm around her shoulder and holds her hand in genuine concern.)

Katara: Haru's mother said they came for him at midnight.
Sokka (dropping her hand): Then it's too late to track him, he's long gone.
Katara: We don't need to track him. The Fire Nation is going to take me right to Haru.
Aang: ...and why would they do that?
Katara (determined): because they're going to arrest me for earthbending.

(Sokka and Aang both looked concerned before cutting to a scene with Katara and Sokka rolling a boulder on top of air grate.)

Sokka: I thought you were crazy at first, Katara, but this might work. There are ventilation shafts throughout these mines, all Aang has to do is send an air current from that vent to this one right here. The boulder levitates and – tada! Fake earthbending.

(When Katara and Sokka and finish rolling the boulder on top of the vent, cut to a wider shot showing the nearby vent that Aang will airbend into. It is partially obscured from the path they are on by a large boulder. Cut to Sokka leaning on the rock they have just moved with a self-satisfied grin on his face. When he is done, the screen widens to show a none-too pleased Katara, hands on her hips, looking over at Aang who is o.c.)

Katara: Aang. Did you get all that?

(The screen pans rapidly over to Aang, who is paying no attention at all. He sits cross-legged in front of the vent, blowing air and a little butterfly in front of him while Momo watches.)

Aang: Sure, I got it.
Sokka: Do you remember your cue?
Aang: Yeh, yeh, just relax. You're taking all the fun out of this.
Sokka: By “this” do you mean intentionally getting captured by an army of ruthless firebenders?
Aang: Exactly! That's fun stuff.

(Cut to wide shot that shows Katara and Sokka on the left, Aang in the middle behind his rock, and a band of Fire Nation soldiers coming down to the path towards them on the right.)

Sokka: Here they come! Get in your places!

(Cut to a close up of the three soldiers marching down the path. Cut to view from behind the soldiers. Sokka runs in from the left, Katara from the right, meeting right in front of the soldiers.)

Sokka (in a slightly exaggerated voice): Get out of my way, pipsqueak!
Katara (also in a slightly exaggerated voice): How dare you call me “pipsqueak” you giant-eared cretin!
Sokka: What did you call me?
Katara: A giant-eared cretin! Look at those things. (She puts her hands up to her ears and fans out her fingers in imitation of huge ears) Do herds of animals use them for shade?
Sokka: You better back off! (Placing his hand to partially block his mouth from the soldier's view) Seriously – back off.
Katara: I will not back off! I bet elephants get together and make fun of how large your ears are!
Sokka: That's it – you're going down!
Katara: I'll show you who's boss – earthbending style!

(Katara assumes a mock earthbending stance as she shouts her challenge. The background music changes to indicate almost supernatural powers and the background itself changes to show earth colored patterns flashing by at high speed. Both effects stop abruptly to show Katara frozen, with the rock she is supposed to be “earthbending” still sitting over the grate. After a few moments of embarrassed silence, she repeats herself angrily.)

Katara: I said, “earthbending style!”

(Cut to the other side of the rock where Aang finally reacts, jumping up into the air and coming down onto the grate. He airbends into the grate. Cut to a view of the rock on top of the other grate. The air rushing up raises the rock to reveal Momo behind it.)

Soldier (pointing at Momo): That lemur! It's earthbending!
Sokka: No, you idiot! It's the girl!
Soldier (embarrassed): Oh, of course.

(Cut back to Sokka and Katara as the rocks falls back onto the grate).

Sokka (in an exaggerated voice, his hands on Katara's shoulders): I'll hold her! (Then sotto voce) You've got 12 hours to find Haru, we'll be right behind you.

(Cut to Katara being led off by the soldiers. She looks back to see Sokka and Aang, with Momo on his shoulders, standing in the road. Sokka turns to Momo.)

Sokka: Momo, you have some big ears!

(Cut to a long shot of the village's port where a Fire Navy ship is docked, then cut to a downcast Katara wearing a brown sackcloth over her blue robe. She is in a wheeled transport with other prisoners being taken to the prison ship. Aang and Sokka are in the crowd watching her being taken aboard. Cut to a sky shot of Appa following the Fire Navy ship from afar. In the distance, a rig or offshore platform is seen. This is the Fire Navy ship's destination. Cut to a close of the rig. It is huge, dark, industrial and foreboding. In the background a bloody sunset casts its last rays of light over the complex. Switch to Aang in Appa's driver's seat, Sokka in the passenger section.)

Sokka: She'll be fine, Aang, Katara knows what she's doing.

(Cut back to a long shot of the prison rig where the sun has now set. Switch to an overhead shot of a prisoner line up. The Warden is addressing the new prisoners.)

Warden: Earthbenders, it is my pleasure to welcome you aboard my modest shipyard. I am your warden. I prefer to think of you not as prisoners, but as honored guests, and I hope you come to think of me as your humble and caring host. You will succeed here if you simply abide –

(The Warden's speech is interest by a prisoner, who is visible behind the warden, who begins to cough. The Warden's look hardens instantly. Cut to a side shot where the Warden suddenly leaps away from the prisoner line up, turns and firebends a hug gout of flame at the coughing prisoner. The targeted man jumps backwards.)

Warden (angry): What kind of guest dishonors his host by interrupting him!? Take him below! (Then quietly) One week in solitary will improve his manners. (He puts his face up to Katara's, but still speaking to the group) Simply treat me with the courtesy I give you and we'll get along famously. You will notice earthbenders, that this rig is made entirely of metal. You are miles away from any rock or earth, so if you have any illusions about employing that brutish savagery that passes for bending among you people, forget them. It is impossible. Good day.

(During the latter part of the Warden's speech, the view has shifted between various shots of hopeless prisoners on the rig. When the Warden is done, he turns and walks o.c. as the prisoners are led away. Cut to a rolling pan up where the camera finally reveals an open area on the rig where hopeless and forlorn looking prisoners roam around. Cut to a view of Katara being thrust through a narrow door and out into the open area. A double gate drops behind her, then cut to Katara's p.o.v. as she surveys the prisoners on the deck. Cut to a side view of the deck. Katara enters from the left. As she passes a prisoner sitting on the deck, he turns and it is Haru.)

Haru (standing up): Katara?
Katara (running and hugging him): Haru!
Haru: What are you doing here?
Katara: It's my fault you were captured. I came to rescue you.
Haru: So, you got yourself arrested?
Katara: It was the only way to find you.
Haru (folding his arms across his chest and smiling): You got guts, Katara, I'll give you that. (Taking her shoulder) Come one, there's someone I want you to meet.

(Cut to overhead shot that pans right over several groups of prisoners. Haru and Katara have approached the last one.)

Haru: Katara, this is my father, Tyro. Dad, this is Katara.

(Cut to a view of older man's face who is sitting on the ground in one of the groups of prisoners. He is eating, but he turns to his son's voice and sees Katara.)

Katara (bowing): It's an honor to meet you.
Tyro (handing Katara a bowl): Have some dinner, Katara.
Katara (taking the bowl her hungry expression turns to disgust): Eruhh!
Tyro: It's not as bad as it looks.
Katara (sitting down and eating a spoonful): Erahh!
Tyro (smiling apologetically): It's still pretty bad though.

(A hand appears on Tyro's shoulder, another prisoner trying to get Tyro's attention.)

Prisoner: Tyro, the prisoners are complaining there aren't enough blankets to go around.
Tyro: I'll talk to the guards. In the meantime, make sure the elderly are taken care of. The rest of us will simply have to hope for warmer weather.
Katara: If you don't mind me asking, what's your escape plan?
Tyro (suspiciously): Excuse me?
Katara: You know, the plan to get everyone off the rig? What is it? Mutiny? Sabotage?
Tyro: The plan? The plan is to survive - wait out this war. Hope that one day some of us can get back home and forget this ever happened.
Katara: How can you say that? You sound like you've already given up.
Tyro: Katara, I admire your courage and I envy your youth, but people's lives are at stake here. The Warden is a ruthless man, and he won't stand for any rebellion. I'm sorry, but we're powerless.
Katara (standing up, grim determination on her face): We'll see about that.

(Cut to Katara standing up on a small raised platform in the open area. She bangs the lid of a pot with her spoon several times to get everyone's attention.)

Katara: Earthbenders! You don't know me, but I know of you. Every child of my water tribe village was rocked to sleep with stories of the brave Earth Kingdom and the courageous earthbenders who guard its borders. (Cut to a view of the Warden watching from one of the catwalks above, Katara continues from o.c.) Some of you may think that the Fire Nation has made you powerless. Yes, they have taken away your ability to bend, but they can't take away your courage and it is your courage they should truly fear! Because it runs deeper than any mine you've been forced to dig, any ocean that keeps you far from home. It is the strength of your hearts that make you who you are, hearts that will remain unbroken when all rock and stone has eroded away. The time to fight back is now! I can tell you the Avatar has returned! So remember your courage, earthbenders, let us fight for our freedom!

(The scene concludes with a close up profile of Katara's face, etched in determination. After a few moments pass, her expression weakens. Cut to a view of the groups of prisoners, who turned away from her and go on with their conversations. Katara is crushed. Cut to the Warden, who smiles and walks away. Shift to a view of the rig's lighthouse lamp rotating in the darkness. A few shots of the rig fly by to be replaced by a view of Aang peeping up over the edge of the rig. Then cut to Katara sleeping on her mat. Aang wakes her up and she starts to cry out, but Aang “shh's” her. He leads back to the edge of the rig's main platform where Appa and Sokka are waiting.)

Sokka: Your 12 hours are up, where's Haru? We've got to get out of here.

(Aang hops off the platform and onto Appa. Sokka holds her arm out to Katara.)

Katara: I can't.
Sokka: We don't have much time, there are guards everywhere. Get on.
Aang: Katara, what's wrong?
Katara (close up, the lighthouse lamp playing directly behind her head): I'm not leaving. I'm not giving up on these people.

(Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(When the show returns, Sokka and Aang have jumped off Appa, who floats in the air beside the platform, and are sitting in a triangle on the rig's edge.)

Sokka: What do you mean you're not leaving!?
Katara: We can't abandon these people. There has to be a way to help them.
Aang: Maybe she's right. What do you say, Sokka?
Sokka: I say you're both crazy! (A searchlight comes close by and they hunker down until it passes.) Last chance, we need to leave – now!
Katara: No.
Sokka (shaking his head): I hate when you get like this. (Another search light comes close). Come on, we better hide.

(The three exit the frame. Cut to Aang whispering something to Appa, who flies off silently. Aang then exits the screen, which then pans northeast to show two Fire Soldiers turning the corner on the rounds. As the round the bend, Appa flies by and the guards notice and look up.)

Guard: Look!

(Cut to a close up of the back of the Warden's head. He turns quickly to address the guards who just saw Appa.)

Warden: Tell me exactly what you saw.
Captain: Well, Sir, it looked like a flying bison.
Warden: What?
Guard It was a giant flying buffalo, Sir, with an empty saddle.
Warden: Which was it? A buffalo or a bison?
Captain: Uh, I'm not sure what the difference is, but that's not really the point is it, Sir?
Warden (angry): I'll decide what the point is, fool!

(Warden throws the Captain over the railing. A scream trails off into nothing as a splash of water is heard. Cut back to the Warden and the remaining guard.)

Warden: You! Wake up the Captain. Search the entire rig!
Guard: Sir?
Warden: What!?
Guard: That...was the Captain you just threw overboard, so...
Warden: Then wake up someone I haven't thrown overboard and search the rig! There's something going on here and I don't like it.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the rig, still on the same night. The view pans north to reveal a loading docks with many crates on it. Cut to a closer shot of Momo peeping over one of the crates, then shift to Katara, Aang, and Sokka crouching amongst the boxes.)

Sokka: We don't have much time. What are we gonna do?
Aang: I wish I knew how to make a hurricane. (Cut to Katara and Sokka looking unhappy at this idea.) The Warden would run away and we'd steal his keys!
Sokka: Wouldn't he just take his keys with him?
Aang: I'm just tossing ideas around.
Katara: I tired talking the earthbenders into fighting back, but it didn't work. If there was just a way to help them help themselves.
Sokka: For that they'd need some kind of earth, or some rock... something they can bend.
Katara (touching the rig platform): But this entire place is made of metal.
Aang (looking up and pointing o.c.): No, it's not. Look at the smoke. I bet they're burning coal – In other words, earth.

(As Aang is speaking, the view cuts to a shot of the smokestacks on the upper reaches of the rig. Behind the stacks, the sky is clearly getting lighter. Cut to a long shot of the rig, dawn is clearly close at hand. Cut to Katara and Sokka back in the prisoner deck area where Katara gave her speech. They are looking down into an enormous ventilation shaft which is capped by a grate similar to the ones seen earlier near the mine where Katara got arrested.)

Katara: It's almost dawn, we're running out of time! Are you sure this is gonna work?
Sokka: It should. These vents reminded me of our little trick back at the village. We're gonna do the same thing, but on a much bigger scale.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the rig as Sokka explains from o.c. how the plan is going to work. As he speaks, the camera view moves or cuts to show what he is talking about.)

Sokka: There's a huge deposit of coal at the base of the silo, and the whole system is ventilated. Aang closed off all the vents except one. When he does his airbending, the coal only has one place to go – right back here.

(The view ends up back with Katara and Sokka as he concludes his explanation. It is now morning. A moment later, however, the shot widens to show them surrounded by six Fire Nation soldiers poiting there spears at them and prisoners, including Tyro and Haru. More Fire Nation guards ring the bottom edge of the shot.)

Soldier: There's the intruder!
Sokka (drawing his boomerang): Stay back, I'm warning you!
Tyro: Katara stop! You can't win this fight!

(Cut from Tyro to Haru, who looks stunned at his father's pronouncement. The camera pans right across him, then cut to Katara with an equally stunned looked, the camera slowly panning left. Then from o.c., but switching to show him after a few words, the Warden arrives.)

Warden: Listen to him well, child. You're one mistake away from dying where you stand.

(Cut to a wider shot of the two surrounded by the soldiers, who begin to close in. Then switch to a close up of the grate, where air begins to rush out, followed by dust and pebbles. Then a living river of coal erupts from the grate, eventually tearing it away. Cut to a very wide shot showing the eruption of coal as it shoots high into the air over the deck, blasting the grate away. Cut to the Warden, clearly shocked and dismayed. The coal lands in a massive pile between the earthbenders and the firebenders, followed by a shot of Haru. The shot then widens to show the prisoners looking at the pile of earth that has just appeared. Cut to a view of the top of the coal pile. Aang drops from the top of the screen and lands on it, covered in coal dust. He coughs it off as Katara runs up to the top of the coal.)

Katara: Here's your chance, earthbenders! (She grabs a lump of coal and raises it high.) Take it! Your fate is in your own hands!

(Haru begins to move forward, but Tyro stops him. Switch to a view from within the crowd. Various prisoners begin to shrink backward, eschewing open conflict. Cut to a view of Katara, still holding up the lump of coal, with the Warden and his men visible over her shoulder.)

Warden: Hahaha! Foolish girl! You thought a few inspirational words and some coal would change these people? Look at these blank, hopeless faces. (Cut to a panning shot of the prisoners, who do look sad.) There spirits were broken a long time ago. Oh? But you still believe in them? (Katara lowers the coal, shock on her face.) How sweet. They're a waste of your energy, little girl. You've failed.

(Cut to a wider shot of Katara standing on the coal, her shoulders slumped, looking defeated and lonely. The Warden turns to walk back into the rig. As he does, a lump of coal flies on screen and hits him in the back of the head. He turns in anger. Cut to Haru, prisoners standing behind him, twirling some lumps of coal above his raised left hand. His expression is severe. Cut back to the Warden, who launches a blast of fire at the boy. The gout of flame is about to engulf Haru, who braces for death, when it is blocked by a wall of coal. Cut to a shot of Tyro, in an earthbending stance, who has clearly stepped forward to protect his son. Cut to a wider of what is about to become the battlefield, before shifting the Warden and his men, now in a firing line.)

Warden: Show no mercy!

(The Fire Nation line charges forward, unleashing a wall of flame. Tyro and the three nearest earthbenders, including Haru block it with a huge wall of coal. The coal absorbs the flames.)

Tyro: For the Earth Kingdom, attack!

(Tyro slams the palms of his fists on the deck of the rig, throwing the wall of coal forward towards the Fire Nation line. The Fire Soldiers deflect some of the rocks with flame. Cut to an overhead shot of the prisoners, all of whom have joined the rebellion and have assumed earthbending stances. The camera pans south to show the firebenders in a similar pose. General melee ensues. One on one the earthbenders block fire attacks with coal shields and knock out firebender by striking htem huge lumps of coal thrown at high speed. Cut to a view of the carnage below from one of the catwalks. Heaps of burning coal now litter the deck. Switch back to the middle of the deck where Katara, Sokka and Aang are rushing forward. A Fire Nation soldier enters the screen, but Sokka cuts off the head of his spear with his boomerang and throws the spearhead with a small shaft still attached to it to Momo who is flying close overhead. Momo then collects spears as they are thrown by Fire Nation soldiers, rendering them harmless. Cut to Tyro and Haru in front of the coal dump. They raise a huge amount of coal, and then mash it between them to create a boulder. Cut to a quick view of the Warden rapidly shooting fireballs at targets o.c., before switching back to Haru and Tyro throwing the boulder at the door into the rig. It blasts a boulder shaped hole in the door.)

Tyro: Get to the ship! We'll hold them off!
Warden: Do not let them escape!

(The Warden rallies a few his troops and they begin to barrage the exit with flame. Cut to Aang, Katara and Sokka trying to exit. When they see the flames hit the wall in front of them, they turn and Aang airbends a small tornado into existence, the end of which is aimed at the firebenders.)

Aang: Guys, throw me some coal!

(Sokka and Katara start dropping chunks of coal into the top of the little whirlwind, which accelerate down the wind tube and exit at high speed towards the Warden's men. Then all get knocked down. Cut to Tyro and two other earthbenders who earthbend the entire coal dump, with the Warden and all his men on it, out of over the open water.)

Warden: No, please! I can't swim!
Tyro: Don't worry, I hear cowards float.

(Tyro drops them all into the ocean below. Fade to a scene of several Fire Nation ships, now under the command of the former prisoners, steaming away from the rig. Appa with Sokka and Aang swim next to the point ship. Cut to Katara, Tyro and Haru on the deck of the point ship. Katara beams, looking back at the prison they leave behind. She is missing her necklace.)

Haru: I want to thank you for saving me. For saving us.
Katara (embarrassed): All it took was a little coal.
Haru: It wasn't the coal, Katara, it was you.
Tyro (putting a hand on her shoulder): Thank you for helping me find my courage, Katara, of the water tribe. My family and everyone here owes you much.
Katara: So, I guess you're going home now?
Tyro: Yes, to take back my village. (Raising his voice and raising his left hand in a fist, just as Katara had done and looking back over the ship to address the former prisoners) To take back ALL of our villages! The Fire Nation will regret the day they set foot on our land!

(Cut to a wide shot of three of the ships, Tyro's ship in the middle and ahead with Appa swimming on the right. The shot pans from left to right, showing cheering earthbenders on the decks of every ship. Cut back to Haru and Katara.)

Haru: Come with us.
Katara: I can't. Your mission is to take back your home. Ours is to get Aang to the North Pole.

(Cut to a shot of Aang in the foreground sitting on Appa, airbending a little chunk of coal around. Katara and Haru are visible on the upper deck on the point ship.)

Haru: That's him, isn't it? The Avatar. Katara, thank you for bringing my father back to me. I never thought I'd see him again. I only wish there was some way...
Katara: I know. (She reaches for her necklace and starts in surprise when it is gone.) My mother's necklace! It's gone!

(Cut to a close up shot of the necklace lying on the deck of the rig. An arm in a Fire Nation uniform grabs it. The screen pans up to reveal Zuko, wreathed in the glory of a fiery red sunset holding the necklace. He looks out over the ocean to the setting sun, back to the camera. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Wide shot of the open sky over a lush river valley. It is a beautiful day with lazy, puffy white clouds and sunshine. Cut to an overhead view of the valley floor, clouds moving below. A red bird moves into view, soon engulfed in an Appa shaped shadow. Cut to a long shot of Appa moving slowly through the clouds, replaced quickly by a pan left showing Aang in Appa's driving seat, leaning back, enjoying himself with a reed in his mouth. As the camera pans left, Katara stretches out on her stomach looking over Appa's side, while Sokka whittles.)

Katara (from o.c. at first): Those clouds look so soft, don't they? Like you could just jump down and you'd land in a big, soft cottony heap.
Sokka: Maybe you should give it a try.
Katara: You're hilarious.

(Cut to Aang, whose head pops towards the camera, almost smashing into it, a wide grin on his face.)

Aang: I'll try it! Yehhhh!

(He jumps right off Appa's side, laughing and hurtling down through the clouds with his staff. Sokka and Katara look over the side of Appa as he plunges through a cloud. A moment later Aang lands next to them with his glider. He is soaking wet.)

Aang: Turns out clouds are made of water!

(He airbends himself dry. Sokka and Katara eye him strangely. Suddenly, Katara turns and looks ahead.)

Katara: Hey, what is that?

(Cut to a forward view. Up ahead, the floor of the valley below around the river is black instead of vegetation green.)

Sokka: It's like a scar.

(Cut to a scene on the floor of the valley in the damaged area. Burnt tree stumps dot the barren landscape. The three have dismounted Appa and are walking around. Aang is in the foreground, Katara on his left back near Appa and Sokka to his right.)

Sokka: Listen, it's so quiet. There's no life anywhere.
Katara: Aang, are you ok?

(Cut to a view of footprints on the burnt ground. Sokka is examining them.)

Sokka: Fire Nation! Those evil savages make me sick! They have no respect for –
Katara: Shh!
Sokka (whispering): What? I'm not allowed to be angry?

(Katara points ahead. Cut to Aang, standing ahead, clearly upset. He sinks to his knees in the dust and sighs. Cut to a frontal shot of Aang, who begins to run his hands through the burnt earth.)

Aang: Why would anyone do this? How could I let this happen?
Katara: Aang, you didn't let this happen. It has nothing to do with you.
Aang: Yes it does. It's the Avatar's job to protect nature. But, I don't know how to do my job.
Katara: That's why we're going to the North Pole to find you a teacher.
Aang: Yeh, a waterbending teacher, but there's no one who can teach me how to be the Avatar. Monk Gyatso said that Avatar Roku would help me.
Sokka: The Avatar before you? He died over a hundred years ago, how are you supposed to talk to him?
Aang: I don't know.

(Momo jumps into his lap and begins to chitter. Aang pets his back. Fade to a scene of Prince Zuko emerging from tall reads into a clearing.)

Zuko (yelling): Uncle! It's time to leave! Where are you? Uncle Iroh!

(The camera pans left to follow Zuko. A fire soldier uniform becomes visible hanging from the low branches of a tree as the screen pans. Cut to Iroh in a hot bath, the tub made out of rock and it is fed by a stream coming out of the rocks behind it.)

Iroh (happily)>: Over here.
Zuko: Uncle? We need to move on, we're closing in on the Avatar's trail and I don't want to lose him!
Iroh: You look tired, Prince Zuko. Why don't you join me in these hot springs and soak away your troubles.
Zuko (angry): My troubles cannot be soaked away. It's time to go!
Iroh: You should take your teacher's advice and relax a little. The temperature's just right. I heated it myself.

(Iroh shifts position slightly, puts his hands together and breathes steam from his nostrils. Cut to Zuko, obscured by steam, who swats it away.)

Zuko: Enough! We need to leave now! Get out of the water!
Iroh (rising): Very well.

(Cut to view from behind Zuko, where Zuko has put his hand up to strategically block the view of Iroh. Cut to view from Iroh's p.o.v.)

Zuko: On second thought, why don't you take another few minutes, but be back at the ship in half an hour or I'm leaving without you.
Iroh (leaning back, happily): Ahhhh!

(Cut back to an overhead shot of Aang still kneeling in the wasteland. Katara approaches him from behind.)

Katara: Hey Aang, are you ready to be cheered up?
Aang: No.

(An acorn flys by from o.c., hitting Aang on the side of the head.)

Aang: Ow!

(Cut to a wider shot of Aang looking at Katara, now in the foreground bouncing another acorn up and down in her right hand.)

Aang: Hey, how was that cheering me up?
Sokka: Hehe, cheered me up.

(Cut to Sokka, who promptly gets whacked by an acorn from Katara on this side of his head.)

Sokka: Ow! Yeh, I probably deserved that.
Katara: These acorns are everywhere, Aang. That means the forest will grow back. Every one of these will be a tall oak tree someday, and all the birds and animals that lived here will come back.

(In the background Momo digs furiously in the scorched earth, emerging with a double handful of acorns. Katara places an acorn in the palm of Aang's hands and closes it.)

Aang (smiling): Thanks, Katara.

(Katara smiles and then makes a startled sound, looking o.c. Cut to a shot of an old man in green using a walking stick approaching the group, then cut back to the group as the old man enters the screen from the right and walks up to Aang.)

Sokka: Hey, who are you?
Old Man: When I saw the flying bison, I thought it was impossible, but those markings... are you the Avatar child?

(Aang turns to Katara, who nods her head. He turns back to the old man and nods his head in turn.)

Old Man: My village desperately needs your help.

(Cut to a late afternoon shot of the sun about to go down beneath hills in the distance. The bottom of the screen shows the upper part of the walls of an Earth Kingdom village. Cut to an overhead shot of the group following the old man into the village. Much of it has been burned out and destrioyed. Sad music plays. They enter one of the buildings where some villagers are gathered. As the Old Man introduces Aang to the people, a man, probably the village chief walks over.)

Old Man: This young person is the Avatar.
Chief: So the rumors of your return are true. (He bows.) It is the greatest honor of a lifetime to be in your presence.
Aang (bows): Nice to meet you too. (Pause). So...is there something I can help you with?
Chief (looking o.c. with a pained expression): I'm not sure...
Old Man: Our village is in crisis, he's our only hope. For the last few days at sunset a spirit monster comes and attacks our village. He is Hei-Bai, the black and white spirit.
Sokka: Why is it attacking you?
Chief (moving to the threshold of the doorway that the group just entered, looking at the setting sun): We do not know, but each of the last three nights he has abducted one of our own. We are especially fearful because the winter solstice draws near.
Katara: What happens then?
Old Man: As the solstice approaches, the natural world and the spirit world grow closer and closer until the line between them is blurred completely.
Chief: Hei-Bai is already causing devastation and destruction. Once the solstice is here there is no telling what will happen.
Aang: So, what do you want me to do exactly?
Old Man: Who better to resolve a crisis between our world and the spirit world than the Avatar himself? You are the great bridge between man and spirits.
Aang (clearly lacking confidence): Right...that's me.
Katara: Hey, ‘great bridge guy', can I talk to you over here for a second?

(Katara walks over to a nearby window. Aang and then a bit later Sokka enter screen from the right. They can now talk privately.)

Katara: Aang, you seem a little unsure about all this.
Aang: Yeh, that might be because I don't know anything at all about the spirit world. (Exasperated) It's not like there's someone to teach me this stuff!
Katara: So, can you help these people?
Aang: I have to try, don't I? Maybe whatever I have to do will just... come to me.

(Momo jumps onto Aang's shoulder and chitters. Aang is surprised, but then smiles. Cut to Katara, the open window behind her, smiling serenely.)

Katara: I think you can do it, Aang.

(Camera pans right from Katara to Sokka, who is also looking at Aang, smiling serenely.)

Sokka: Yehhh, we're all gonna get eaten by a spirit monster.

(Fade back to Iroh soaking in his outdoor hot spring bath. An overhead that is slowly zooming in is quickly replaced by a close up of Iroh snoring peacefully in the bath. A noise startles Iroh into wakefulness.)

Iroh: Uh? Who's there?

(Switch to Iroh's p.o.v., his head clearly scanning back and forth over the forest in front of him. A small rodent jumps onto the lip of the bath. He lets it jumps onto his outstretched hand.)

Iroh: A meadow vole! I should have known. You startled me, little one. (Lets vole go and leans back in the bath and puts his hands behind his head.) Ehh, seems I've dozed off and missed my nephew's deadline, but it was a very sweet nap.

(The vole starts hopping up and down on the lip of the bath and making chittering noises. Suddenly it stops, the ground starts shaking from deeper in the forest. It flips around to see dust clouds rising from the forest and then hops away. Switch to a panning shot from the forest's p.o.v. The camera pans up as the ground disturbance or tremor moves. Soon it reaches Iroh's bath and we see that two other shock waves have approached the bath from Iroh's left and right. The old general has been caught by surprise and when the shockwaves reach his tub he is quickly held fast by three triangular stones that have been pushed into the tub. A second later, three earthbenders appear next to the tub behind each of the three stone projectiles that are holding Iroh imprisoned. Cut to an Earth Kingdom soldier taking Iroh's uniform off the tree, screen pans right to show an officer walking up to the bath.)

Soldier: He's a Fire Nation soldier.
Captain: He's no ordinary soldier. This is the Fire Lord's brother, the Dragon of the West, the once great General Iroh, but now, he's our prisoner.

(Cut back to Iroh, squinting unhappily at his ignominious capture. Cut to an overhead shot of the forest outside of the Earth Kingdom village. The sun has nearly set. The screen pans down and fades to Aang exiting the meetinghouse building where he had met the chief. The doors close behind him. Aang begins to walk through the village, hands defensively wrapped around his staff.)

Aang: Hello? Spirit, can you hear me? This is the Avatar speaking. I'm... here to try to help stuff.

(Cut to a view of Aang about to exit the village gate. The shot zooms out to show Sokka and Katara, backs to the audience, watching Aang from the window of the meeting house. The sun has almost set.)

Sokka: This isn't right. We can't sit here and cower while Aang waits for some monster to show up.

(Cut to a frontal view of the window. The old man stands behind the siblings. Part way through the ensuing conversation, switch to a side view, showing that much of the village waits in fear in the meetinghouse with the Old Man, Katara and Sokka.)

Old Man: If anyone can save us, he can.
Sokka: He still shouldn't have to face this alone.

(Outside, the sun sets. The world darkens. Cut to Aang, standing at the village gate, like a gunslinger.)

Aang (shouting): The sun has set. Where are you, Hei-Bai? Well, spirit, uh, I hereby ask you to please leave this village in peace!

(He twirls his staff like a marching baton and then plants it in the ground like a flag. His expression is resolute. Cut to a longshot view from behind of Aang standing at the gate.)

Aang: Okay. Well, I guess that's settled then.

(Aang turns and begins to walk back to the village. Cut to a shot of Aang from behind, who quickly turns to exit the screen to the right, leaving a view of the dark woods. Spirit whispers begin to be heard. Suddenly a massive shape emerges from the forest, its huge feet making large thudding sounds each time they hit the ground. Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(When the show returns, Aang is still walking placidly up the village street, unaware that Hei-Bai is following right behind him. Hei-Bai is as big as a house, with six legs and black and white orca-like markings all over his body. He is vaguely mammalian and has razor sharp teeth. Aang realizes something is amiss and stops. He turns, looks up at the monster, and smiles.)

Aang: You must be the Hei-Bai spirit. (He bows his head.) My name is...

(He is cut off by a blast of air and blue energy from the mouth of the creature, Aang does not move but his staff is blown to the ground. The spirit rears itslef itself up on its hind-most legs and bellows, releasing another jet of blue energy from its mouth. It gets back on all six legs and then charges into the village, ignoring Aang and leaving him behind. Aang turns to address the monster as it moves in.)

Aang: My name is Aang! I'm the Avatar and I would like to help! Hey, wait up!

(The spirit destroys in rapid succession two houses and a watchtower using its brute strength and blue energy. The monster continues to destroy building off screen as Aang follows it around trying to get its attention.)

Aang: Uh...

(Cut to a frontal view of the meetinghouse window, where Katara and Sokka look out. Sokka looks poised to jump out the window to join the fray. The village chief is behind them.)

Chief: The Avatar's methods are... (they duck as flying debris hits the window) unusual.
Sokka: It doesn't seem too interested in what he's saying. Maybe we should go help him?
Old Man: No, only the Avatar stands a chance against the Hei-Bai.
Katara: Aang will figure out the right thing to do, Sokka.

(Momo appears to Sokka's right in the window, his eyes blinking widely. Cut to a side view shot of a building. Just beyond, a huge pile of debris gets blown above the building. Hei-Bai enters from the right as the screen pans down to reveal Aang running to the building between he and the monster.)

Aang: Please, would you stop destroying things and listen?

(He jumps on top of the building between them. He sees Hei-Bai pounding a building into the ground with his fists.)

Aang: I'm just trying to do my job as spirit bridge. Excuse me, would you please turn around? I command you to turn around now!

(At this the monster does indeed turn around, swatting Aang backward off the top of the building. Aang flys through the air and hits a nearby roof. He slides off and collapses on the ground. Cut back to the meetinghouse window.)

Sokka: That's it! He needs help! (He exits to his left.)
Katara: Sokka wait!

(The doors of the meetinghouse open and Sokka runs out. Katara follows, but is stopped by the old man.)

Old Man: It's not safe!

(Cut to the monster standing over Aang in the foreground, while in the background we see Sokka, hefting his boomering, having just emerged from the meeting house. Cut to close of Sokka, ready to shoot.)

Sokka: Hei-Bai! Over here!

(He lets loose the boomerang. Switch to a view of the creature from behind. The boomerang rotates into view, hits the creature's butt, and bounces off with a sound effect indicating its harmless impact. It falls on the ground. Cut back to Sokka, who runs up to Aang.)

Aang: Sokka, go back!
Sokka: We'll fight him together, Aang.
Aang: I don't wanna fight him unless I – huh!

(Hei-Bai comes on screen in a flash from the left and takes Sokka. Both disappear in an instant, cutting Aang off in mid-sentence. Aang opens his staff into glider mode and takes off. Cut to the monster loping back into the forest, Aang gliding in pursuit. Katara runs into the picture from o.c., but stops at the village gate, clearly unable to catch up.)

Katara: Sokka!

(Cut to frontal shot of Katara, who looks down in sadness, sympathetic villagers coming up behind her. Cut to a shot of Zuko lowering a tree branch from eye-level so he can move forward, a Fire Nation soldier behind him. He barges into the clearing with the ruined hot tub.)

Zuko: Uncle! Uncle, where are you?
Soldier: Sir, maybe he thought you left without him?
Zuko: Something's not right here. (He examines the hot tub, now with the stone projectiles embedded in it.) That pile of rocks...
Soldier: It looks like there's been a landslide, sir.
Zuko: Land doesn't slide uphill. Those rocks didn't move naturally. My uncle's been captured by earthbenders!

(Cut back to Aang gliding at breakneck speed through the forest in pursuit of Hei-Bai, then to Sokka in the grip of the monster, making scared noises. Cut to a side view of the monster where it is clear that Aang has pulled even with it and is beginning to pass, but he hits a branch and slows down.)

Sokka: Aang, over here!

(Cut to an overhead shot where Aang is playing catch up again. Hei Bai enters the wasteland from the beginning of the episode, Aang close behind. Switch to a close up of Sokka in the grip of the monster.)

Sokka: Help!
Aang: Hang on, Sokka!

(Aang glides in closer, stretching his hand to Sokka, who is able to grab it. Just as Aang begins to pull Sokka free, however, both he and the monster vanish. Aang falls out of the sky in surprise. Cut to Aang laid out at the base of the stone statue of a bear. Fade to black. The scene returns with Aang sitting up, with a crescent moon overhead. Aang seems bathed in moonlight.)

Aang: Sokka! (He looks around and the view zooms out a bit.) I failed.

(Fade to another night scene of treetops. The screen pans down and then a cut to soldiers on war ostriches, a lantern hanging off the point soldier's mount. The screen pans left to show four mounts total, one of them bearing a basically naked and chained General Iroh.)

Iroh: Where are you taking me?
Captain: We're taking you to face justice.
Iroh: Right. But where, specifically?
Captain: A place you're quite familiar with, actually. You once laid siege to it for 600 days, but it would not yield to you.
Iroh (whistfully): Ah! The great city of Ba-Sing-Se.
Captain: It was greater than you were, apparently.
Iroh (defensively): I acknowledged my defeat at Ba-Sing-Se! After 600 days away from home, my men were tired and I was tired, (yawns, puts face in the back of the soldier he is riding with) and I'm still tired.

(Iroh falls off the ostrich and the soldier stops to look. Cut to Iroh lying on the road, chained up tight, but a smile on his face. The put a light on him and pick him up. After they exit the screen, the camera pans down and zooms to show the sandal that Iroh has left behind. Cut back to Iroh, who smiles. Shift to view to Katara sitting at the village gate, looking into the forest. The old man comes up behind her while the noises of the night fill the air.)

Old Man: I'm sure they'll be back.
Katara: I know.
Old Man (putting a cover over Katara's back): You should get some rest.
Katara (holding Sokka's boomerang and trying to sound hopeful): Everything's gonna be okay.
Old Man: Your brother is in good hands. I would be shocked if the Avatar returned without him.

(In the midst of the Old Man's comforting words, Aang appears along the forest trail leading up to the gate. In this light it is clear now that he is not just illuminated by the moon. He is in fact colored a light blue, as if he is glowing slightly in some surreal fashion. In the foreground we can see Katara's downcast face on the left of the screen as Aang begins to speak.)

Aang: Katara, Katara I lost him.

(Neither she nor the old man react to Aang's voice. As Aang comes closer, the sun rises behind her and the old man.)

Old Man: The sun is rising. Perhaps he will return soon.
Aang: What? No, I'm right here! Grrr!!!

(He puts his hands in front of the old man's face, but to no effect. Cut to Aang's p.o.v., with the rising disk of the sun in front of him. He looks at his hands glowing blue. Switch to a frontal view of Aang which zooms up to his face.)

Aang: I'm in the spirit world!

(Fade to white. Scene returns to a daytime shot of the sandal that Iroh left behind. Zuko picks up the sandal and sniffs it, a look of disgust spreading over his face.)

Zuko: Yup, that's Uncle Iroh.

(Cut to wide shot of Zuko standing next to his war rhinoceros, the cut to Katara standing dejectedly next to the gate post. The shot widens to show Aang sitting next to her.)

Aang (smiling): I'll figure this out, Katara, I promise. Like they said, I'm the bridge between the worlds, right? All I have to do is... figure out what I have to do. But once I do that, no problem!

(Aang looks to his right, then cut to Appa moving along the outside of the wall towards Katara and Aang. He grunts and puts his nose up to her.)

Aang: Appa! Hey buddy, I'm right here. But, I guess you can't see me either.

(Appa keeps grunting at her until she looks up at him.)

Katara: It's ok, Appa. I'm sure they're on their way back. I bet they even found you a bunch of moon peaches for a treat.

(She walks back into the village, Appa in tow. Cut to a frontal shot of Aang turning to look back down the forest path.)

Aang: What am I supposed to do?

(The shot expands to show much of the forest.)

Aang (shouting): Avatar Roku, how can I talk to you?

(He gets no response at first and looks down in despair. Then, he notices something and looks back down the path, his face showing elation.)

Aang: Sokka?

(A light shines from down the path. The camera zooms up to it to reveal a blue spirit dragon flying toward him. Cut back to Aang who sees this with alarm.)

Aang: That's definitely not Sokka!

(He opens his glider and takes flight back into the village, but he hits the ground again a few feet away. He gets up and tries to airbend the glider off the ground, but nothing happens. Aang looks down at his hands in disbelief.)

Aang: What? I can't airbend in the spirit world!

(Cut to the blue spirit dragon bearing down on Aang, then cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(When the show returns we once again see the blue dragon, wreathed in radioactive blue fire, bearing down on Aang. Cut to the clearing in front of the gate where Aang stands. Suddenly the dragon is upon him and Aang cowers beneath it, fear framing his young face.)

Aang: You don't know where Sokka is, do you?

(In response, the dragon bends its head down and touches Aang's head with one of its whiskers. Aang's eyes glow with a blue fire when touched. A flashback begins of an old man riding the dragon the way Aang rides Appa. They approach the camera; in life the dragon was red and brown. The flashback ends as the blue dragon breaks its touch.)

Aang: You're Avatar Roku's animal guide! Like Appa is to me. I need to save my friend and I don't know how. Is there some way for me to talk to Roku?

(The dragon bends its neck and Aang jumps on.)

Aang: I'll be back Katara. (To the dragon) Take me to Roku!

(Aang and the dragon take off. Cut to Katara stroking Appa sadly, with Aang and the dragon visible of her left shoulder as they depart. Fade to an overhead shot of a winding mountain path. The four war ostriches plod along it. Cut to Iroh and his captor. He looks up and is startled to see the blue dragon and Aang whiz by overhead. They pass right over the heads of the procession, but it is clear that only Iroh has seen anything.)

Captain: What's the problem?
Iroh: Nothing. Actually, there is a bit of a problem. My old joints are feeling sore and achy and these shackles are too loose.
Captain: Too loose?
Iroh: That's right. The cuffs are loose and they jangle around and bump my wrists. It would help me if you would tighten them so they wouldn't shake around so much.
Captain: Very well. Corporal, tighten the prisoner's hand cuffs.

(Cut to a shot of the sky over the path which pans down to reveal the ostriches parked on the ground. The corporal gets off and he touches Iroh's handcuffs, Iroh breathes on them. They become red hot and Iroh grabs the corporal's hand and puts them on the hot iron. The corporal screams in pain and Iroh hops off the ostrich. He launches himself into the air and fires a blast of flame from his feet at the other soldier's on their ostriches. He rolls off the path and down the hill during the ensuing uproar. Cut to a view from Aang's p.o.v. on the dragon as they swiftly approach a volcanic island. It has a beautiful Fire Temple on it, which they enter and fly straight towards the ceiling.)

Aang: Hey, what are you doing!? Ahhhh!!!

(They rapidly approach the ceiling, which they pass through harmlessly. The dragon alights on the floor of a secret chamber at the top of the temple. It is empty except for the statue of an old man in the background. Aang dismounts and walks toward the statue.)

Aang: I don't understand. This is just a statue of Roku.

(Aang looks back at the dragon, which touches him on the temple once again. Aang's eyes light up blue, and this time the vision is of a huge, flaming comet rocketing through the sky. The vision ends as the dragon breaks contact.)

Aang: Is that what Roku wants to talk to me about? A comet? When can I talk to him?

(The dragon lowers its head in response. Cut to a wider shot where it now revealed that the sun shines through a tiny window high up in the ceiling. The shaft of light, previously blocked by the dragon, now hits the wall near Roku's right shoulder. The dragon touches Aang again and a vision of time passing at the Fire Temple begins. Cut to an exterior shot of the temple sitting on its volcanic promontory. Clouds fly by at incredible speed overhead and the sun rounds its daily course in a matter of seconds. Three days pass in this fashion before a fade to show the floor of the statue's chamber. Two Asian written characters are shown before cutting to a shot of the little window where the sunlight enters. Days pass in rapid succession there as well. Shift to a long shot of the statue from the back of the room, where it is clear with each day the spot where the shaft of sunlight hits the back wall gets closer to hitting the statue's face as each day passes. The vision ends.)

Aang: It's a calendar, and the light will reach Roku on the solstice! (Turning to dragon) So, that's when I'll be able to speak to Roku? (The dragon grunts.) But I can't wait that long. I need to save Sokka now.

(Cut to a long, overhead shot of Aang and the dragon departing the volcanic and terrific speed, then cut to Iroh rolling down the hillside, still chained. The earthebender soldiers watch him from over the lip, earthbend a torrent of dirt and rock after him and then slide down the hillside in pursuit. When they catch up to him, Iroh is almost buried.)

Soldier: He is too dangerous, Captain. We can't just carry him to the capital. We have to do something now.
Captain: I agree. He must be dealt with immediately and severely.

(Cut to a close up of Iroh's face. He spits out a stone and looks with disdain upon his captors. Cut to Appa and Katara flying reconnaissance over the forest.)

Katara: It's no use, Appa. I don't see them anywhere. Our best hope is to go back to the village and wait.

(Cut to wide shot as she turns Appa to fly back to the village. Shift to a huge reptilian foot slamming into the ground where a clear trail of the war ostriches can be seen. Cut to Zuko atop his war rhinoceros, who looks over his shoulder to see Appa flying in the distance.)

Zuko: The Avatar!

(He yanks the reigns to turn the beast back, but then he looks down the trail that leads to his captured uncle. He looks back again in the direction he saw Appa, indecision marking his face. Cut to Aang and the dragon flying through the wasteland at the edge of the forest. Up ahead the bear stature can be seen, rapidly growing larger. His body sits crossed legged atop it. Aang braces himself for impact, but he rejoins his own body as the dragon disappears into the statue. He wakes up, now back in the material world. He jumps down off the statue and turns to stare in wonder at it. After a close up of the face of the bear statue, Aang opens his glider and flies back toward the village. Cut to a view of the setting sun from the village where Katara looks downcast. She is standing on the porch of the meetinghouse. Out of the sunset Aang comes into view and lands near her. She rushes to hug him and Momo flies to perch on his master's shoulder.)

Katara: You're back! Where's Sokka?
Aang (downcast): I'm not sure.

(The sun sets and both look over their shoulders to the forest. Fade to Iroh and his captors in an earthen pit. Iroh is stretched over a large rock in the center of the pit, his hands spread before him.)

Captain: These dangerous hands must be crushed.

(The captain cries aloud as he raises a huge boulder from the ground and moves it to hover over Iroh's hands. He drops it. A moment before it crushed Iroh's hands and arms, Zuko enters the screen from the left and kicks it out of the way. He lands and breaks the chains holding Iroh's hands bound with a kick. Iroh rises with a smile.)

Iroh: Excellent form, Prince Zuko.
Zuko: You taught me well.
Captain: Surrender yourselves, it's five against two. You're clearly outnumbered.

(Cut to Iroh and Zuko, back to back, surrounded by their would be captors.)

Iroh: Uh, that's true, but you are clearly outmatched!

(All five earthbenders launch stones at the pair. Iroh swings his chains and breaks them into pieces mid-flight, while Zuko blasts the two nearest him with fire. Cut to a frontal view of Zuko where it is clear that the two soldiers behind him have just shot two large rocks at him. Zuko is about to be hit when the stones are wrapped in Iroh's chains. He swings them around his body and releases them back at their captors. They are hit in the stomach and are both knocked out. The Captain launches several rocks at Zuko, who dodges them and returns fire. The fire blast is blocked when the Captain lowers his head and the fire breaks harmlessly over his onion shaped helmet. The Captain raise two huge sheets of rock and Zuko looks afraid, but then chains wrap around the Captain's feet and his is pulled to the ground by Iroh. The rocks land on top of him. Cut to the Earth Kingdom soldiers groaning and buried in dirt, Iroh and Zuko standing over them. They look at each other and smile, Zuko putting his hand on his uncle's shoulder. Cut to an overhead shot of the pit.)

Zuko: Now would you please put on some clothes!

(Fade to Aang standing at the village gate once again. It is still night. Cut to the chief, Momo and Katara looking out of the meetinghouse window towards Aang, then cut to Aang standing at the gate again, the wind blowing dead leaves past him. Some time has evidently passed, and Aang's begins to walk back into the village. As he approaches a building with a wind chime that is sounding in the wind, the monster appears. Cut to the monster breaking through the roof of the building with the wind chime. It roars in triumph, releasing blue energy from its mouth. Cut to Aang who cries out and begins to make an energy shell similar to the one he created in “The Southern Air Temple.” Cut to Katara looking out the window.)

Katara: Aang, what are you doing? Run!

(The creature roars and runs toward another building, but Aang runs underneath its legs and then jumps up onto its forehead. His hand glows light blue, and Aang sues a panda bear superimposed over the monster. Aang jumps back to the porch of a nearby building.)

Aang: You're the spirit of this forest. Now I understand. You're upset and angry because your home was burned down. When I saw the forest had burned I was sad and upset. But my friend gave me hope that the forest would grow back.

(The spirit stands still while Aang speaks. When he is finished, he shows Hei-Bai the acorn that Katara gave him. The spirit smiles and Aang places the acorn on the porch. The monster picks up the acorn and transforms into a panda, who turns and walks away from the village. Cut to Aang standing on the porch. The shot widens to show Katara and the other villagers coming up behind him. The scene then shifts to the panda exiting the gate. Behind him a thicket of bamboo grows to man height in seconds. A moment later, Sokka and a few villagers exit the thicket looking confused.)

Katara: Sokka!

(She runs to hug him, as other villagers hug their loved ones.)

Sokka: What happened?
Katara: You were trapped in the Spirit world for 24 hours. How are you feeling?
Sokka (looking pained): Like I seriously need to use the bathroom!

(Cut to the chief flanked by two villagers on each side. It is sometime later that night.)

Chief: Thank you, Avatar. If there only were a way to repay you for what you've done.
Sokka: You could give us some supplies and some money.
Katara (angrily elbowing her brother): Sokka!
Sokka: What? We need stuff.
Chief (bowing): It would be an honor to help you prepare for your journey. (He exits.)
Katara: I'm so proud of you, Aang. You figured out what to do all on your own.
Aang: Actually, I did have a little help. And there's something else.

(Aang looks downcast, cut to a flashback of the comet vision.)

Sokka: What is it?
Aang: I need to talk to Roku and I think I've found a way to contact his spirit.
Katara: That's great!
Sokka: Creepy, but great.
Aang: There's a temple on a crescent shaped island, and if I go there on the solstice I'll be able to speak with him.
Katara: But, the solstice is tomorrow.
Aang: Yeh, and there's one more problem. The island is in the Fire Nation.

(Music gets dramatic and cut to the terrified faces of Sokka and Katara. Camera pans up to the moon over the hills.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Scene opens with a shot of the bright full moon over a mountain range. The camera pans down to Aang and Appa in the square of a village. Aang is frustratedly pulling on Appa's reins.)

Aang (groaning and pulling on the reins): Let's go Appa! Come on, boy!
Appa: GRRRRRRR

(Appa and Aang face each other.)

Aang: Look, I'm sorry, but Katara and Sokka aren't coming to the Fire Nation with us. If they got hurt, I'd never forgive myself. (angrily) So get your big butt off the ground and let's go!

(Aang continues to pull on Appa's reins. Appa continues to remain immovable. Aang pulls so hard on the reins that he falls to the ground. Camera zooms in on his dejected face. Suddenly, Aang hears Sokka's voice and turns around. Sokka, Katara and members of the village are standing behind Appa.)

Sokka: I think his big butt is trying to tell you something.
Katara: Please don't go, Aang. The world can't afford to lose you to the Fire Nation. Neither can I.

(Scene cuts to a close up of a comet racing across the sky. Cut back to Aang. He gets up from the ground and walks towards Sokka and Katara.)

Aang: But I have to talk to Avatar Roku to find out what my vision means. I need to get to the Fire Temple before the sun sets on the Solstice. That's today.

(Aang jumps up onto Appa's back and looks back hesitatingly at Sokka and Katara. Sokka and Katara jump in front of Appa.)

Katara: We're not letting you go into the Fire Nation, Aang.
Sokka: At least not without your friends. We got your back.

(Scene cuts to Momo jumping up onto Aang's arm. Momo chitters happily. Scene cuts to a wide view of Aang, Appa, Katara and Sokka. Appa licks Sokka from to head.)

Sokka: EWWWWW
Chief: It's a long journey to the Crescent Island. (He hands Aang a parcel.) You'll have to fly fast to have any chance of making it befor/ie sundown. Good luck.
Aang: Thank you, for your...
Chief (urgently pointing away): Go!

(Appa takes off and the scene cuts to an aerial view of the village. Scene cuts to the Chief coming out of a door. He is sighing and rubbing his forehead. He walks directly into Prince Zuko. Zuko is accompanied by General Iroh on the back of a war rhinoceros.)

Zuko: Having trouble sleeping? (Zuko pushes the Chief back into the doorway. Camera cuts to a close up of Zuko's face.) Seen the Avatar lately?

(Scene cuts to an ocean view. The sun is high in the sky. The camera pans to Appa flying through the clouds and zooms in on Katara, Sokka and Aang on Appa's back. Aang looks over his shoulder at the rising sun. He turns forward with a determined look on his face.)

Aang: Come on, boy! We've got a long way to go! Faster!

(Scene cuts to a wide view of Appa flying. He pumps his large tail and growls in assent. Scene cuts again to Zuko's ship racing through the ocean. Camera zooms in on the ship's deck. Cut to a close up of General Iroh's face.)

Iroh (concerned and frustrated): Sailing into Fire Nation waters... of all the foolish things you have done in your 16 years, Prince Zuko, this is the most foolish.

(Scene cuts to a close up of the deck of Zuko's ship. Zuko is in the forefront looking through a high powered spy glass. A guard is behind Zuko to the left. Iroh is behind Zuko to the right.)

Zuko: I have no choice, Uncle.
Iroh (angrily): Have you completely forgotten that the Fire Lord banished you?!?!? (With a look of anguish and worry) What if you're caught?
Zuko (turning around from the spy glass): I'm chasing the Avatar. My father will understand why I'm returning home.
Iroh: You give him too much credit. My brother is not the understanding type.

(Zuko turns back to the spy glass. Scene cuts to Zuko's view of the sky through the glass. He searches the skies for a few seconds and identifies Appa's flying form in the distance.)

Zuko: There they are! Helmsman, full steam ahead!

(Scene cuts to Appa flying in the foreground with Zuko's ship gaining on them in the background. Camera zooms in on Katara and Sokka.)

Katara: Aang, we got trouble.
Sokka: Yeah, and its gaining fast!

(Scene cuts to a close up of the bowels of Zuko's ship. A catapult is raised from below onto the deck of the ship. The catapult is loaded with a steaming and smoldering projectile. The camera pans to Zuko and Iroh standing behind the catapult. Iroh, fanning himself, wrinkles his nose in disgust.)

Iroh (groaning): Really, Prince Zuko, couldn't you shoot them down with something more fragrant?

(Zuko shoots a fire ball at the projectile and it ignites. He raises his arm in the air.)

Zuko: On my mark.........Fire!

(A Fire Nation soldier cuts the catapult's rope and the fiery projectile is hurtled into the air. The camera follows the track of the fire ball and zooms in on Katara and Sokka on Appa's back. Katara turns around and shouts to Aang.)

Katara: Fire ball!
Aang: I'm on it!

(Aang pulls hard on Appa's reins. Appa swerves just in time. The fire ball sails over his head. Scene cuts to Sokka, Katara and Aang on Appa's back.)

Katara (covering her nose with her hand): We have to get out of Zuko's range before he shoots another hot stinker at us!
Sokka: Can't you make Appa go any faster?
Aang (holding his nose): Yeah, but there's just one little problem.

(Camera cuts back to a close up of Zuko's face. His eyes widen.)

Zuko: A blockade!

(Scene cuts to a panoramic view of the ocean with a double line of Fire Nation war ships as stretching to the horizon. The camera zooms in on the deck of one of the war ships. It is lined with trebuchets. Scene cuts back to Zuko's face. Behind him are the Fire Nation soldier and General Iroh.)

Iroh (pulling on his beard thoughtfully): Technically you are still in Earth Kingdom waters. Turn back now and they cannot arrest you.

(Zuko glares at his Uncle. Scene cuts to a close up of Aang on Appa's back. He is looking at the line of war ships.)

Aang: If we fly north we can go around the Fire Nation ships and avoid the blockade. It's the only way.
Katara: There's no time.
Aang: This is exactly why I didn't want you to come. Its too dangerous.
Katara: And that's exactly why we're here.
Sokka: Let's run this blockade.
Aang: Appa! Yip! Yip!

(Appa growls affirmatively and soars swiftly off screen. Scene cuts to a long distance view of Zuko's ship. Camera zooms in on Iroh and Zuko.)

Zuko: He's not turning around.
Iroh: Please Prince Zuko, if the Fire Nation captures you, there is nothing I can do. Do not follow the Avatar.
Zuko (bowing his head): I'm sorry, Uncle. (Turning to his helmsman, he points forward) Run the blockade!

(Scene cuts to the view from another spy glass, this one belonging to Commander Zhao. He focuses first on Appa and then on Zuko's ship.)

Zhao: The Avatar...and the banished Prince. This must be my lucky day.
Soldier: Commander Zhao, what are your orders?
Zhao: Shoot the Bison down.
Soldier: But there's a Fire Navy ship out there, Sir, one of our own. What if it's hit?
Zhao: So be it. (The soldier starts back in alarm.) It belongs to a traitor. (Zhao turns towards a soldier standing ready at the trebuchet.) Ignite! (The soldier ignites one trebuchet. The camera pans down the length of the ship as each soldier ignites his assigned trebuchet.) Launch!!!

(Fire balls fly into the air on either side of Zhao. Scene cuts to a long distance view of all the war ships in the blockade launching fire balls at the same time. The camera zooms in on Zuko and Iroh on the deck of their ship as they watch the approaching barrage of fire balls. Scene cuts to a close up of Appa, Aang, Sokka and Katara. They all scream as the fire balls come racing towards them. Appa swerves and dips and dives to avoid the fire balls. The camera zooms in on Aang's face. His teeth are clenched. His hands are tight around Appa's reins as he tries to help the Bison avoid the fire balls. Scene cuts to a close up of a fire ball. The fire ball grazes Appa's back. Katara, Sokka and Momo beat out the fire on Appa's back. Appa growls in anger and pain.)

Aang: Appa! Are you ok?
Appa (affirmatively): Grrrrrr!

(Scene cuts to the fire balls sailing towards Zuko's ship. The camera zooms in on the deck of the ship. A soldier is trying to keep his balance as the ship is rocked by waves created by the fireballs hitting the water close to the ship. One fireball lands extremely close to the ship and generates a wave that breaks across the deck. Another fireball hits the back part of the ship. Prince Zuko braces himself against the catapult. He turns towards the front of the ship. The engine master calls to him from off screen. Zuko turns around to speak to him. The engine master points to the billowing fire and smoke behind him.)

Engine Master: Prince Zuko, the engines are damaged! We need to stop and make repairs!
Zuko (turning back towards the front of the ship): Do not stop this ship.

(Scene cuts to a close up of Commander Zhao. Trebuchets stand ready behind him.)

Zhao: Launch!

(Scene cuts to a panoramic view of Zhao's fleet. Each ship launches multiple fireballs into the air. Scene cuts to Appa bursting through the clouds, a cumulus trail in his wake. The camera zooms in on Aang from behind. He is trying to help Appa avoid the fireball bombardment. In front of them, 12 fireballs shoot through the clouds, smoke trailing behind them. Appa swerves to miss one on his left. The camera zooms in again on Aang's back as a fireball bursts in front of them. Aang, Katara and Sokka all scream as Appa swerves. Scene cuts to a long distance view of Appa diving to avoid the fireballs. The smoke trails from multiple fireballs surround Appa. Appa flies directly past the camera. The camera now picks up the view from Appa's eyes. Fireballs continue to shoot through the sky. Two fireballs collide and explode directly in front of Appa. Appa growls and rears up to avoid the combustion. He bucks and Sokka is thrown from his back. Katara screams and reaches out for Sokka. Sokka begins to fall and disappears into the clouds below. The camera zooms in on Aang's face. He screams Sokka's name and pulls hard on Appa's reins. Appa dives to catch Sokka before he hits the ocean. The camera follows Appa's dive and Sokka's fall. Appa gets beneath Sokka. As Sokka continues to fall, Katara reaches out her hand to catch him. The camera zooms in on Katara and Sokka's hands as they clasp. Appa hits the water, each of his six legs using the ocean's surface like a trampoline. He begins his ascent. The camera cuts to a close up of Sokka and Katara sitting in Appa's saddle. A large pink fish is thrown up from the ocean and hits Sokka directly in the face. Sokka gasps and falls backward. The fish bounces off his face to be caught by a chittering Momo. The scene cuts to the Fire Navy ships as they let loose another barrage of fiery missiles. Appa, still close to the surface of the water, swerves back and forth as fireballs land in the ocean. The camera zooms in on Aang again. He is fully concentrated on avoiding the fireballs. The scene cuts to the deck of Zhao's ship. Zhao is standing in the foreground, a fully loaded trebuchet in the background. He raises his right arm.)

Zhao: Ready......

(Scene cuts to a close up of Appa flying headfirst into the Fire Navy blockade. The tension mounts as Appa flies closer and closer to the blockade line. The scene cuts to an aerial view of Appa, Aang, Katara and Sokka. The scene cuts again quickly to a close up of Zhao's face.)

Zhao: Fire!

(A single fireball is shot at Appa. The scene cuts to a close up of Aang's left eye as he watches the fireball approaching. With a determined look on his face, Aang leaps from Appa. He assumes the airbending pose. The camera zooms in on Aang and the fireball headed on a collision course for one another. Aang grunts and kicks a burst of air directly into the center of the approaching fireball. The fireball explodes from the inside out as a result of Aang's blast. The fragments form a halo of smoke and debris around Appa. Appa flies through the center of the halo. Aang loses his balance amidst the flying rubble and is thrown back onto Appa's shoulders. Sokka and Katara grab his arms to steady him. Appa flies through the Fire Nation blockade. The camera zooms out. Appa is merely a tiny, white bison-shaped speck as he passes the blockade line. Scene cuts to an euphoric Aang. He raises his left fist into the air.)

Aang: We made it!!!

(The camera pans up to a shot of Sokka and Katara. Both have looks of shock and amazement on their faces.)

Sokka (in pure disbelief): We got into the Fire Nation......(his shoulders slump)...Great...

(Scene cuts to Commander Zhao. He is approached by one of his soldiers.)

Soldier: Where do you think the Avatar is headed, Sit?
Zhao (bowing his head): I'm not sure. (turning his head towards Prince Zuko's approaching ship) But I bet a certain banished prince will know.

(Scene cuts to Prince Zuko's ship approaching the Fire Navy's blockade. As Zuko's ship gets closer, the ships of the blockade move towards each other in order to bar his way. Scene cuts to Iroh and Zuko on the deck of Zuko's ship.)

Iroh: We're on a collision course!
Zuko: We can make it!

(Scene cuts to the deck of Zhao's ship. A large group of Fire Nation soldiers stands at parade rest behind him. Their leader snaps to attention and speaks.)

Soldier: The boarding party is ready to apprehend Prince Zuko, Sir.
Zhao: Wait. Cut the engines. Let them pass.
Soldier: Sir?

(Zhao does not respond. Zuko's ship slides easily through the blockade. The camera cuts back and forth between Zhao's and Zuko's determined faces. The scene cuts again to Zuko and Iroh. Iroh looks at the blockade fading into the distance. He looks pensive and strokes his beard. He is not sure what to make of Zhao's move. Scene cuts to Appa flying through Fire Nation air space. Appa grunts. Appa continues to fly. His tail begins to droop and his legs slacken as he gets more and more tired. Appa, Katara, Sokka and Momo relax on his back. The scene cuts to Aang falling asleep on Appa's head. Momo is sleeping on Aang's head.. Suddenly, Aang's face lights up in recognition.)

Aang: There it is! The island Roku's dragon took me to!

(A crescent shaped island appears through the clouds. In the center of the crescent is a large, active volcano. Fire and steam belch forth from it's cone. Appa flies towards the island. The camera zooms in on the Fire Temple Aang has been seeking. The temple sits on a promontory directly below the volcano. Appa lands near the temple. Aang pats Appa's face lovingly.)

Aang: You did it buddy. Nice flying.

(Appa groans and rolls onto his side in pure exhaustion. Katara walks towards Appa and begins to rub his tummy. Sokka is stretching in the background)

Katara (to Appa): Oh! You must be tired!
Sokka (thinking that Katara is talking to him) No. (grunting and stretching) I'm good. (jogging in place) Refreshed and ready to fight some firebenders.
Katara (turns towards Sokka a wry look on her face): I was talking to Appa.
Sokka (stopping in mid jog): Well, I was talking to Momo.

(The camera zooms in on Momo hanging upside down from a nearby tree. He chitters and looks quizzically at Sokka. Scene cuts to a close up of the steep path leading to the Fire Temple. Aang, Katara and Sokka walk hesitatingly up the path. They continually look to their left and right in anticipation of an attack. Scene cuts to a close up of the Fire Temple. The camera pans down the temple. Sokka, Aang, Katara and Momo are crouched behind a low wall in front of the temple.)

Sokka: I don't see any guards.
Katara: The Fire Nation must have abandoned the temple when Avatar Roku died.
Aang: Its almost sundown. We'd better hurry.

(Aang leaps over the low wall. Sokka, Katara and Momo follow him. The camera cuts back and forth between the setting sun and Aang, Katara, Sokka and Momo running through the temple. Scene cuts to Aang, Katara and Sokka tip-toeing through the center of the temple. Sokka stops in mid tip-toe.)

Sokka: Wait......I think I heard something.

(Sokka, Aang and Katara turn around. Behind them are 5 elderly men in red robes. One of the elderly men speaks and identifies the group as Fire Sages.)

Fire Sage: We are the Fire Sages. Guardians of the temple of the Avatar.

(Scene cuts to a close up of Aang, Sokka and Katara. All have puzzled and startled looks on their faces. Aang steps forward.)

Aang: Great! I am the Avatar.

(Scene cuts back to a close up of the Fire Sages.)

Fire Sage: We know.

(The Fire Sage assumes the firebending pose and shoots a fireball at Aang. The camera zooms in on the fireball as it races towards Aang. Fade to black.)



Act II

(Scene opens with a wide shot of the interior of the Fire Temple. Three fireballs are swiftly approaching Aang. Aang assumes the airbending pose and deflects the fireballs. He turns towards Sokka and Katara.)

Aang: I'll hold them off. Run!

(Aang turns back to face the Fire Sages as Sokka and Katara run down the corridor. His face is determined. He bends low and swipes his leg in an arc sending a burst of air directly at the feet of the Fire Sages. All five of the Fire Sages are knocked to the floor, face first. They grunt as they fall. Aang runs after Sokka and Katara. The Fire Sages slowly pick themselves up off the floor.)

Fire Sage: If the Avatar contacts Roku, there's no telling how powerful the boy will become. Split up and find him!

(The camera zooms out into an aerial view of the temple corridor. The five Fire Sages all move off in different directions. Scene cuts to a close up of Katara, Sokka and Momo running through the temple. As they approach a corner, Aang comes running towards them. They stop abruptly to avoid running head first into Aang.)

Aang: Follow me!
Sokka: Do you know where you're going?
Aang: Nope! (Aang disappears around the corner. Sokka, Katara and Momo begin to follow him. Suddenly, Aang comes running back around the corner. A Fire Sage is hard on his heels.) Wrong way!

Shyu: Come back!

(Aang, Sokka, Katara and Momo continue to race around corner after corner trying to lose the pursuing Shyu. Finally, they run into a corridor that turns out to be a dead end. With no escape, they face the Fire Sage.)

Shyu: I don't want to fight you. I am a friend.

(Scene cuts to a shot of Sokka, Aang and Katara in battle positions.)

Sokka: Firebenders aren't our friends.

(Shyu moves carefully towards them. As he approaches Aang, he drops to his knees and bows.)

Shyu: I know why you're here, Avatar.
Aang (surprised and relaxing his poise): You do?
Shyu: Yes. (standing up) You wish to speak to Avatar Roku. I can take you to him.

(Scene cuts to a close up of Sokka, Aang and Katara. Their faces are quizzical and wary.)

Aang: How?

(The Shyu reaches towards the wall and turns the light fixture. The fixture is a lever. Behind the fixture is small hole in the wall. Shyu takes a deep breath and shoot fire through the hole. Fire frames one of the panels in the wall. The panel slides back and to the right. The secret passage is revealed. A long staircase carved into the rock of the mountain disappears into the dark below.)

Shyu (gesturing towards the secret passage): This way.

(Scene cuts back to Aang, Katara and Sokka, their faxes still showing apprehension and distrust. Suddenly a voice from behind Shyu says, “Find them.” The camera cuts back to Shyu. He looks quickly and nervously behind him and turns back to Aang, Katara and Sokka.)

Shyu: Time is running out. Quickly!

(Scene cuts back to Aang, Katara and Sokka. Aang and Katara look at each other and nod in agreement. All three start towards the opening to the secret passage. Shyu follows them into the passage. He touches a lever and closes the door behind them. Scene cuts to Prince Zuko's damaged ship sailing through the water. Dark black smoke billows from the back of the ship. The camera cuts to an extreme close up of Prince Zuko's hand gripping a bar. His hand clenches. The camera zooms out to Zuko and Iroh on the deck of the ship.)

Zuko: What's he up to, Uncle? Why didn't Commander Zhao arrest me?
Iroh: Because he wants to follow you. He knows you'll lead him to the prize you're both after...the Avatar.
Zuko: If Zhao wants to follow our trail of smoke, then that's exactly what I'll let him do.

(The camera zoom in on Zuko's determined face. Slowly the shot fades from Prince Zuko's face to the Fire Temple. The sun is setting to the left. The temple is silhouetted in shadow on the right. Scene cuts to Aang, Katara, Sokka, Momo and Shyu walking down the stairs and into a vast and cavernous system of tunnels. They continue to walk through the tunnels, the live magma from the volcano to their right.)

Shyu: Avatar Roku once called this temple his home. He formed these secret passages out of the magma.
Aang: Did you know Avatar Roku?
Shyu: No. But my grandfather knew him. Many generations of Fire Sages guarded this temple long before me. We all have a strong spiritual connection to this place.
Aang: Is that how you knew I was coming?
Shyu: A few weeks ago, an amazing thing occurred. The statue of Avatar Roku, its eyes...began to glow!
Katara: That's when we were at the Air Temple. Avatar Roku's eyes were glowing there too!
Shyu: At that moment, we knew you had returned to the world.
Aang: If this is the Avatar's temple, why did the Sages attack me?
Shyu: Things have changed. In the past, the Sages were loyal only to the Avatar. When Roku died, the Sages eagerly awaited for the next Avatar to return. But he never came.
Aang (pausing and leaning against the tunnel wall): They were waiting for me.
Sokka (putting his arm around Aang's shoulders): Hey, don't feel bad. You're only a hundred years late.

(Aang glares at Sokka. The camera zooms in on Shyu as he speaks.)

Shyu: They lost hope the Avatar would ever return. When Fire Lord Sozen began the war, my grandfather and the other Sages were forced to follow him. (shaking his head in dismay) I never wanted to serve the Fire Lord. When I learned you were coming, I knew I would have to betray the other Sages.

Aang (bowing slightly to Shyu): Thank you for helping me.

(The camera cuts to a close up of Shyu's face. He smiles warmly at the young Avatar. Scene cuts to Shyu, Aang, Katara, Sokka and Momo climbing up steps in the tunnel.)

Shyu: We'll follow these stairs to the sanctuary. (Scene cuts to a long deep spiral of stairs. The party continues to climb up and up.) Once you're inside, wait for the light to hit Avatar Roku's statue. Only then will you be able to speak with him.

(Scene cuts to the light from a single window shining into an otherwise dark room. Suddenly, the floor lifts up and Shyu's head appears. He walks up the final steps into the temple, followed by Aang, Katara, Sokka and Momo. The camera zooms out as they proceed towards the doors to the sanctuary. Shyu gasps suddenly.)

Shyu: NO!
Aang: Shyu, what's wrong?
Shyu: The sanctuary doors, they're closed.
Katara: Can't you just open them with firebending? Like you opened that other door?
Shyu: No. Only a fully realized Avatar is powerful enough to open this door alone. Otherwise the Sages must open the doors together with five simultaneous fire blasts.

(The camera cuts to a close up of Sokka's face. He scratches his chin thoughtfully.)

Sokka: Five fire blasts, huh? (Sokka's face lights up with an idea. The camera pans up to a lantern, in lieu of a light bulb, directly above his head. The “ding” of discovery sounds.) I think I can help you out.

(Scene cuts back to Prince Zuko's ship. Smoke is still pouring out of the damaged rear engine. The camera pans to the back of the ship. Zuko has instructed the men to open the back hatch of the ship. A smaller vessel is being lowered into the ocean. Scene cuts to a close up of Prince Zuko. He is speaking to Iroh.)

Zuko: Uncle, keep heading north. Zhao will follow the smoke trail while I use it as a cover.

(Camera cuts to Iroh. He grunts, strokes his beard and shakes his head disapprovingly.)

Iroh: Hmmmm

(Scene cuts to the smaller ship being deployed. It lands safely in the water and disappears into the smoke. Scene cuts to the view from Commander Zhao's spyglass. Just as Zuko predicted, all he can see is the black smoke from the damaged ship. The camera cuts to a close up of Zhao's face. He lowers the spyglass. Scene cuts back to Sokka, Shyu, Aang and Katara standing in front of the doors to the Fire Temple Sanctuary. Sokka is sitting on the floor, Momo on his knee. Sokka is filling small sacks.)

Sokka: This is a little trick I picked up from my father. I seal the lamp oil inside an animal skin casing, Shyu lights the oil soaked twine and tada! Fake firebending!
Katara: You've really outdone yourself this time, Sokka.
Shyu: This might actually work.

(Sokka stuffs the animal skin sacks into the mouths of the five lion heads guarding the door to the sanctuary. Sokka runs away from the doors. He joins Katara, Aang and Momo behind the nearest columns for protection from the blasts.)

Shyu: The Sages will hear the explosions, so as soon as they go off, you rush in.
Katara (turning towards Aang): Its almost sunset. Are you ready?
Aang: Definitely.

(Shyu sends a small stream of fire past the five lion heads. The twine ignites. Shyu joins Aang behind the column. Sokka crouches and holds tightly onto Katara's skirts. The small bombs go off and smoke fills the chamber. Aang runs towards the doors and pulls on the handles. The doors will not budge.)

Aang: They're still locked.
Shyu: It didn't work.

(Aang sinks to the floor. Scene cuts to an outside view of the Fire Temple. The sun is setting. Fade to black.)



Act III

(The scene opens with a shot of the Fire Temple lit by the setting sun. Scene cuts to Aang. Katara, Sokka, Shyu and Momo standing in front of the doors to the sanctuary. Aang is angrily hurling air blasts at the locked doors.)

Aang: Why won't it open! Aargh!
Katara (grabbing Aang's arm): Aang, stop! There's nothing else we can do.
Aang (hanging his head): I'm sorry I put you through all this for nothing.

(Sokka approaches the doors. He runs his finger through the soot produced by the blasts. Momo chitters and crawls over the lion faces.)

Sokka: I don't get it. That blast looked as strong as any firebending I've seen.
Katara: Sokka! You're a genius!
Aang: Wait, how is Sokka genius? His plan didn't even work.
Sokka: Come on Aang, let her dream.
Katara: You're right. Sokka's plan didn't work...but it looks like it did.
Aang: Did the definition of “genius” change in the last hundred years?

(Scene dissolves to Shyu leading the four other Fire Sages to the sanctuary's doors.)

Shyu: Hurry! The Avatar has entered the sanctuary.
Fire Sage: How did he get in?
Shyu: I don't know. But look at the scorch marks and down there!

(Shyu points to the space between the doors and the floor. A shadow, as if of two feet, moves back and forth.)

Fire Sage: He's inside. Open the doors immediately before he contacts Avatar Roku.

(Scene cuts to Aang perched on the dragon's tail wrapped around the columns. He slowly inches he way to the floor, ready to run the minute the Fire Sages open the doors. The camera pans to the five Fire Sages in firebending pose. They shoot five fire blasts into the lion's heads on the face of the door. Smoke appears around the door jambs. Scene cuts to a close up of the lock mechanism on the face of the doors. As the fire blasts work their way through the lock, the doors begin to creak and open slowly. The light from the interior of the sanctuary is initially blinding. As it begins to dissipate, the Fire Sages see a lone Momo inside the sanctuary. Momo sneezes and looks quizzically at the Fire Sages.)

Fire Sage: It's the Avatar's lemur! He must have crawled through the pipes! We've been tricked!

(Momo suddenly leaps at the Fire Sage's face, knocking him down. Katara and Sokka jump from behind two columns and grab the two nearest Fire Sages. They pull the Fire Sages' clothes over their heads. Shyu grabs the last Fire Sage. All four Fire Sages are subdued.)

Shyu: Now, Aang!
Katara: Aang! Now's your chance!

(Prince Zuko and Aang appear from behind a column. Zuko has taken Aang prisoner. He is holding Aang's arms tightly behind his back.)

Zuko: The Avatar's coming with me!

(The tables turn for Katara, Sokka, Shyu and Momo. Momo flies towards the ceiling. Katara, Sokka and Shyu are tied with chains to the nearest column. Zuko pushes the struggling Aang towards the opening in the floor that leads to Avatar Roku's secret tunnels.)

Zuko: Close the doors! Quickly!

(Aang looks over his shoulder at Sokka and Katara. As he and Zuko reach the opening, he makes several swift moves and knocks Prince Zuko off balance. Aang kicks Zuko down the stairs and turns around quickly. As Zuko tumbles down the stairs with a grunt, Aang runs towards the doors of the sanctuary which are beginning to close.)

Katara: Go!

(Aang banks left and jumps into the air to avoid a fire blast. He does several turns in mid-air. Aang uses the heads of two of the Fire Sages as stepping stones on his way to the doors. He sails through the doors just as they are closing. The doors shut and the locks grind.)

Katara: He made it!

(A blast of bright white light comes from behind the sanctuary doors. Scene cuts to Aang inside the sanctuary. He crouches on the floor in front of Avatar Roku's statue. The setting sunlight comes through an octagonal window at the top of the sanctuary. The light is reddish and moves slowly up the great statue.)

Aang (standing up): The light hits the statue and I talk to Roku. So why isn't anything happening?

(Scene cuts back to the entryway. Four of the Fire Sages and Prince Zuko assume firebending poses. They shoot five simultaneous fire blasts at the doors. This time, however, the lock mechanism does not respond. The camera cuts to a close up of Zuko's face. He is extremely aggravated.)

Zuko: Why isn't it working? It's sealed shut!
Fire Sage: It must have been the light. Avatar Roku doesn't want us inside.

(Scene cuts to a panoramic view of the outside of the Fire Temple. The sun is sinking slowly into the sea. Scene cuts again to the interior of the sanctuary. Aang stands in the center of the sanctuary facing Roku's statue. The light from the window is now on Roku's chest.)

Aang: Why isn't anything happening? I don't know what I'm doing! All I know is airbending! Please, Avatar Roku, talk to me!

(Scene cuts to a close up of the Avatar Roku's face. The sunlight moves up his face. When the light hits the statue's eyes, they begin to glow. The sanctuary is filled with white smoke. When the smoke clears, Aang is standing face to face with Avatar Roku. They are on the top of a mountain range.)

Roku: It's good to see you, Aang. What took you so long?

(Camera cuts to a close up of Aang's face. He is shocked and amazed. He bows deeply to Avatar Roku. The scene cuts back to the entryway to the sanctuary. Shyu is kneeling on the floor in front of Prince Zuko. His hands are tied behind his back. The four Fire Sages stand behind him.)

Zuko: Why did you help the Avatar?
Shyu: Because it was once the Sages' duty. It is still our duty.

(Suddenly, from behind Prince Zuko, comes the sound of one pair of hands clapping. Scene cuts to Commander Zhao approaching with Fire Nation troops.)

Zhao: What a moving and heartfelt performance. I'm certain the Fire Lord will understand when you explain why you betrayed him.
Fire Sage (bowing): Commander Zhao...
Zhao: And Prince Zuko, it was a noble effort. But your little smoke screen didn't work. Two traitors, in one day, the Fire Lord will be pleased.

(A Fire Nation soldier moves towards Zuko and grabs him. Zuko struggles.)

Zuko: You're too late, Zhao. The Avatar's inside and the doors are sealed.
Zhao: No matter. Sooner or later, he has to come out.

(Scene cuts to a close up of Sokka and Katara. They exchange worried glances. Scenc cuts back to Avatar Roku and Aang.)

Roku: I have something very important to tell you, Aang. That is why, when you were in the spirit world, I sent my dragon to find you.
Aang: Is it about that vision? The one with the comet?
Roku: Yes.
Aang: What does it mean?

(The camera pans so that Roku's face is on the left of the screen. The light of the mountain range fades into a starry night sky. The comet slowly crosses the screen from left to right as Avatar Roku speaks.)

Roku: One hundred years ago, Fire Lord Sozen used that comet to begin the war. He and his firebending army harnessed its incredible power and dealt a deadly first strike against the other nations.

(The camera follows the arc of the comet across the sky. The scene slowly fades to the light of the mountain range as the comet approaches Aang.. Aang is standing on the right of the screen as the comet fades away.)

Aang: So the comet made them stronger?
Roku: Yes. Stronger than you could even imagine.
Aang: But that happened a hundred years ago. What does the comet have to do with the war now?
Roku: Listen carefully. (Scene cuts to a close up of Fire Lord Ozai. His body is black against a wall of flames.) Sozen's comet will return by the end of the summer. And Fire Lord Ozai will use its power to finish the war once and for all. (Ozai takes a deep breath, raises his head, and screams a burst of fire from his open mouth. Scene cuts back to Avatar Roku.) If he succeeds, even the Avatar won't be able to restore balance to the world. Aang, you must defeat the Fire Lord before the comet arrives.
Aang: But I haven't even started learning waterbending, not to mention earth and fire.
Roku: Mastering the elements takes years of discipline and practice. But if the world is to survive, you must do it by summer's end.

(The camera zooms in on Aang's face. Fear and worry wash across his features. The scene fades into bright white light. When the light fades out, the scene is a close up of Commander Zhao and his troops standing in front of the sanctuary doors, waiting for Aang to emerge. The troops assume the firebending pose.)

Zhao: When those doors open, unleash all your firebending power.

(Scene cuts to Sokka, Katara and Shyu chained to a column.)

Katara: How's Aang going to make it out of this?
Sokka: How're we going to make it out of this?

(The camera pans to the Fire Nation troops, standing ready to attack. A bright white light takes us back to Avatar Roku and Aang.)

Aang: What if I can't master all the elements in time? What if I fail?
Roku: I know you can do it Aang, for you have done it before. The solstice is ending. We must go our separate ways...for now.
Aang: But I won't be able to come back to the temple. What if I have questions? How will I talk to you?
Roku: I am a part of you. When you need to talk to me again, you will find a way. (The camera zooms in on Roku's face. He closes his eyes. The scene dissolves to Commander Zhao's ships waiting in the bay outside the Fire Temple.) A great danger awaits you at the temple. (The scene dissolves back to a close up of Roku's face.) I can help you face the threat. (The scene dissolves from a close up of Roku's face to a close up of Aang's face. Dissolve to Commander Zhao and his troops in battle positions outside the sanctuary doors. Dissolve to a close up of Aang's face. The arrow on his head begins to glow.) But only if you are ready.

(Aang opens his eyes. They are glowing. He opens his mouth to speak. His mouth is glowing.)

Aang: I'm ready.

(The camera zooms out to a shot of Roku and Aang on the top of the mountain. Smoke begins to swirl faster and faster around them. The scene dissolves to the door of the Fire Temple sanctuary. A blinding white light is coming from inside the sanctuary. Commander Zhao and his troops are silhouetted against the light. Smoke billows out into the entryway from the bottom of the door. The camera follows the smoke to where the Fire Sages are standing. They look at the floor in shock and fear. Scene cuts to Sokka, Katara and Shyu tied to a column. The light from the sanctuary continues to grow. All three turn their heads away to shield their eyes. Scene cuts back to Zhao and his troops in front of the door. The door begins to open, slowly. Scene cuts to Prince Zuko tied to another column. He too turns his head away from the light. Scene cuts back to a close up of Zhao and two of his soldiers standing ready to attack. The camera pans to the left, showing the rest of Zhao's soldiers.)

Zhao: Ready...

(The camera continues to pan to the door of the sanctuary. The light fades. As the doors begin to fully open, two large glowing eyes are visible in the dark of the sanctuary. Smoke continues to emanate from the sanctuary. Scene cuts to Sokka and Katara struggling against their chains.)

Katara: No! Aang!

(Scene cuts back to a close up of Commander Zhao in firebending pose.)

Zhao: Fire!

(Zhao shoots a fire blast into the sanctuary. Scene cuts to several pairs of hands shooting fire blasts into the sanctuary. The camera zooms out to take in all of Zhao's soldiers. In total, nine soldiers, including Zhao, are concentrating all their fire power at the entrance to the sanctuary. The fire blasts are not entering the sanctuary. They are being held at the door and manipulated into a gigantic ball of swirling fire. The camera zooms in on the fire ball. It slowly begins to open. At the heart of the fire ball is Avatar Roku, his eyes glowing. The camera cuts to a close up of Zhao's shocked face. Scene cuts to Sokka, Katara and Shyu.)

Shyu: Avatar Roku!

(Scene cuts back to Avatar Roku. He draws the fire ball back towards himself and shoots it out into the room. Zhao and his soldiers are knocked to the floor. The heat of the blast melts the chains holding Sokka, Katara, Shyu and Zuko. Zuko, now free, runs. Scene cuts to the outside of the Fire Temple. Avatar Roku's blast has breached the temple walls. Scene cuts back to Avatar Roku. His entire body is now glowing. The camera zooms in on his face as he turns to look at the cowering Fire Sages. They take fright and run for their lives. Scene cuts to Sokka, Katara and Shyu.)

Shyu: Avatar Roku's going to destroy the temple! We have to get out of here!
Katara: Not without Aang!

(Scene cuts back to Avatar Roku standing in the doorway to the sanctuary. He raises his arm and brings it down on the floor of the temple. The force of his strike rends the floor. Molten lava rises to the surface. The camera zooms in on Roku's hand. He lifts it up, pulling the magma from deep within the volcano. Scene cuts to the volatile lava spurting and rising. A wall of magma shoots up through the entire temple structure. The lava explodes out of the very top of the temple. Scene cuts to Zhao and his men racing down the stairs. Scene cuts back to the entryway to the sanctuary. Sokka and Katara are crouched behind a column for protection. Avatar Roku lowers his hands. The camera zooms in on Roku. He takes a deep breath and pushes his breath down. Scene cuts to the statue of Avatar Roku. The sunlight moves up his face. The eyes of the statue are no longer illuminated by the setting sun of the solstice. Scene cuts to a close up of Avatar Roku. The smoke created by Roku's pyrotechnics are sucked back towards him. He is completely shrouded in the smoke. As the smoke swirls and dissipates, Aang is standing in the entryway to the sanctuary. His eyes are glowing. He closes his eyes, groans and sinks to the floor. Katara and Sokka run to his side.)

Sokka: We got your back.
Aang: Thanks. Where's Shyu?
Katara: I don't know.

(Scene cuts to the outside of the Fire Temple. Molten lava is pouring down the sides of the volcano. Smoke is billowing from the bottom of the temple. The temple begins to sink. Scene cuts to Sokka, Katara and Aang. They approach the stairs that will lead them out of the temple. Lava has reached all but the top few steps. They realize that they are trapped. One of the columns crashes to the floor behind them. The gasp and run towards the hole in the temple wall created by Roku's blast. They see that the temple is being devoured by the volcano. Scene cuts to their dismayed faces. Suddenly, they gasp. Scene cuts to Momo and Appa flying full speed towards the temple. Sokka, Aang and Katara slide down one of the peaks of the temple onto Appa's back. Appa zooms away just as the temple sinks further. Scene cuts to a close up of Aang, Sokka and Katara on Appa's back. Aang is in the foreground. His arm rests on a bundle of scrolls. Momo hops up onto his lap, chittering. Momo has the hat of one of the Fire Sages on his head. Scene cuts to a panoramic view of the temple with Zhao's ships in the bay. The temple explodes. The camera zooms in on Zhao as he watches Appa fly off into the sunset.)

Zhao (angrily): No prince. No Avatar. Apparently the only thing I do have is five traitors.
Fire Sage: But Commander, only Shyu helped the Avatar.
Zhao: Save your stories for the Fire Lord. As far as I'm concerned, you're all guilty! Take them to the prison hold!

(Scene cuts to Appa caught in Prince Zuko's spyglass. He watches the bison fly away. He slowly lowers his spy glass. The scene cuts to Zuko's ship sailing away from the ruined Fire Temple. Scene cuts to Appa flying through the night sky. He is surrounded by puffy clouds. Scene cuts to Appa flying towards a bright full moon. The moon is large in the background. Aang, Katara Sokka and Momo are silhouetted against the light of the moon. Aang has drawn apart from his friends. His head hangs down with the weight of what he has learned. First Katara gets up and moves towards Aang. She sits next to him and puts her arm around his shoulders. Next Sokka, gets up and moves toward Aang. He sits next to Aang, his hand on Aang's arm. Finally, Momo flies towards Aang. He chitters and comes to rest directly in front of Aang. Appa growls lovingly, his tail rising and falling. The light from the moon grows brighter and brighter. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Opening shot of Appa flying through a mostly cloudy sky, broken only by a few shafts of sunlight that pierces the cloud cover dramatically in certain areas. Cut to Aang pacing up and down Appa's back, a worried expression on his face and then Sokka driving Appa.)

Sokka: Would you sit down? If we hit a bump you'll go flying off! What's bugging you anyway?
Aang: It's what Avatar Roku said. I'm supposed to master all four elements before that comet arrives.
Sokka: Well, let's see, you've pretty much mastered airbending and that only took you 112 years... I'm sure you can master three more elements by next summer.
Aang (a frightened expression on his face): I haven't even started waterbending and we're still weeks away from the North Pole! What am I gonna do!?

(Aang has put his head in his hands in frustration. Cut to a view of the side of Aang's body, his left arm now hanging loose. Katara's arm appears as she grabs his hand. She pulls him to her where she is kneeling in the passenger area. Aang kneels beside her as she takes his hands in his.)

Katara: Calm down. It's going to be okay. If you want, I can try and teach you some of the stuff I know.
Aang: You'd do that?

(Katara nods her head and smiles. She and Aang then crawl over to the edge of the saddle to look down.)

Katara: We'll need to find a good source of water first.
Sokka: Maybe we can find a puddle for you to splash in.

(Cut to a shot of a huge waterfall followed by a rapid zoom backward to show the river running away from the bottom of the fall. Katara, Sokka, Aang and Momo are on the left bank. Cut to close shot of Sokka and Katara. He looks a little sour, she looks up in excitement and happiness at the mighty waterfall. Screen pans left to show Aang with an expression similar to Katara's.)

Sokka: Nice puddle.

(Cut to a shot of the three from a p.o.v. out in the catch basin of the water fall. Appa swoops in overhead, grunts loudly and drops himself into the water. Cut to Momo on a rock in the catch basin. The sun is blotted by a shadow – the wave of water from Appa's messy swan dive. The wave crashes over him and he is soaked. Cut to Appa rolling over in the water, relaxing. Switch to Aang who has removed everything but his underwear and is ready to join the fun. Katara, visible in the background, does not look pleased.)

Aang: Yehhh! Don't start without me, boy!
Katara: Remember the reason we're here.

(Caught at the moment of running to jump in the water, stops and looks back to Katara.)

Aang: Oh right, time to practice waterbending.

(Cut to a long shot of the three on the bank. Aang pulls up his pants.)

Sokka: Great. So what am I supposed to do?
Aang: You could... clean the gunk out of Appa's toes?

(Aang picks up a leafy branch and holds it out to Sokka, who folds his arms across his chest.)

Sokka: So, while you guys are playing in the water, I'm supposed to be hard at work picking the mud out of a giant bison's feet?
Aang (smiling): Mud and bugs!
Sokka (pausing for a second): Okay.

(Sokka grabs the branch and walks away, resigned to his task. Cut to Appa resting low in the water, where he is blowing bubbles. Fade to a view of a Fire Navy ship's prow as it breaks the water. As the camera zooms backward, a jet of fire erupts off the main deck. Cut to Prince Zuko firing blast after blast of fire at his sparring opponent. Suddenly the ship tilts to starboard, knocking both combatants off balance.)

Zuko: Someone's changing our course!

(Cut to a shot of the bridge from Zuko's p.o.v., then cut to a shot of helmsman at the wheel. The screen pans right as Zuko enters.)

Zuko: What's the meaning of this mutiny? No one told you to change course!

(Cut to a shot from behind Zuko and the helmsman to reveal Iroh and some other crewman playing Pai Sho nearby.)

Iroh: Actually, someone did. I assure you it is a matter of utmost importance, Prince Zuko.
Zuko: Is it something to do with the Avatar?
Iroh: Even more urgent. It seems... I've lost my lotus tile.

(Iroh moves a piece forward on the Pai Sho board. Cut to Zuko, who is mystified.)

Zuko: Lotus tile?
Iroh: For my Pai Sho game. Most people think the lotus tile insignificant, but it is essential for the unusual strategy that I employ.
Zuko (incensed): You've changed our course for a stupid lotus tile?
Iroh: See, you, like most people, underestimate its value. Just give me ten minutes to check the merchants at this port of call. Hopefully they'll have the lotus tile in stock and I can get on with my life!

(Zuko works hard to contain his anger, ultimately releasing a gout of flame from his mouth the licks over the ceiling. Cut to a smiling Iroh, who is soon clouded with smoke.)

Iroh: I'm lucky to have such an understanding nephew.

(Fade to a shot of Appa's paw, with one of the gaps between his toes flossed with Sokka's leafy branchy. Cut to a wider shot of Appa floating on his back, Sokka hard at work on his toes. Appa grunts happily.)

Sokka: Yeh, don't get too happy. You gotta do me next.

(Cut to Katara and Aang on the river bank. As Katara begins to explain, she starts to waterbend the move she is describing.)

Katara: This is a pretty basic move, but it still took me months to perfect, so don't be frustrated if you don't get it right away. Just push and pull the water like this...

(She begins to bob gracefully back and forth, the water on the river edge moving back and forth with her.)

Katara: The key is getting the wrist movement right.
Aang (getting up and imitating Katara): Like this?
Katara: That's almost right, if you keep practicing, I'm sure eventually –
Aang: Hey, I'm bending it already!

(View pans left to show Aang moving around a respectably sized wave of water. Cut to a surprised Katara.)

Katara: Wow, I can't believe you got that so quickly. (Looking a little unhappy.) It took me two months to learn that move.
Aang: Well, you had to figure it out on your own. I'm lucky enough to have a great teacher.
Katara: Thanks.

(Cut to an overhead shot of Katara and Aang from the p.o.v. of the top of the waterfall.)

Aang: So, what's next.
Katara: This is a more difficult move. I call it "streaming the water."

(Cut to closer view of the pair. Katara moves her hands and pulls out of a stream of water from the river and begins to loop it around.)

Katara: It's harder than it looks so don't be disappointed if...

(Cut to a wider shot that shows Aang has already mastered this move. He is moving around his stream of water as if it were a toy as Katara stands motionless. After a few minutes of frolicking, cut to Katara who definitely looks sour. She drops her water stream. Aang plays with his for a few more seconds and then dumps his back into the river.)

Katara: Nice work, though the over-the-head flare was unnecessary.
Aang: Sorry. Well, don't stop now, keep'em coming!
Katara: Well, I kinda know this one other move, but it's pretty hard. I haven't even totally figured it out yet. The idea is to create a big, powerful wave...

(Katara concentrates, raises a blob of water out of the river, but it falls back upon itself when Katara's concentration collapses. Aang sets up to try.)

Aang: So, like this?

(He raises his hands and a huge wall of water shoots up into the air. Cut to Sokka with the wave building visibly behind him. He turns and his eyes go wide.)

Sokka: Aang!

(He gets soaked as the wave breaks over he and Appa. Cut to Sokka coming up out of the water since he had been washed off Appa. Cut back to Katara and Aang.)

Aang: Looks like I got the hang of that move! What else ya got?
Katara (crossly): That's enough practicing for today.
Sokka: Yeh, I'll say! (Cut to a shot of a bunch of bags floating down the river.) You just practiced our supplies down the river!
Aang: Uhhh... sorry. I'm sure we can find somewhere to replace all this stuff.
Sokka (sinking back under the water): Ugh, it was hard enough when you were just an airbender.

(Cut to a pan shot of a port village, then shift to the kids walking down a market street. Various shots of tough looking sailors, merchants and shady types run past each other. In the background a big man is holding up a much smaller one for an unknown reason, as the smaller one yells, "Please, put me down!" Another shopkeeper in blue is addressing a crowd, holding up a sack and asking, "Who's brave enough to look into this bag?" Fade to Katara and Aang sitting in a shop window. Sokka exits the shop.)

Sokka: We've got exactly three copper pieces left from the money that King Bumi gave us. Let's spend it wisely.
Aang: Uhh, make that two copper pieces, Sokka. I couldn't say no to this whistle!

(Aang produces a white whistle in the shape of a bison from behind his back. Aang draws in a great breath and blows into it, cut to Sokka with his fingers in his ears to stop the sound he believes is coming. Nothing happens – only the sound of rushing air.)

Sokka: It doesn't even work. (Momo chitters into Aang's ear as his master stops blowing into it.) See, even Momo thinks it's a piece of junk.
Katara: No offense, Aang, but I'll hold the money from now on.

(Aang looks guilty and then hands over the money to Katara. Fade to an overhead pan right shot of the port. Cut then to one of the larger ships at the dock where one of the crew is soliciting customers.)

Pirate Barker: Earth Nation! Fire Nation! Water Nation! So long as bargains are your inclination, you're welcome here! Don't be shy, come one by!

(Cut to Aang, Katara and Aang walking by the ship. The pirate runs right up to them, but they keep walking.)

Pirate Barker: Oh! You there! I can see by your clothing that you're world traveling types. Perhaps I can interest you in some exotic curios?

(Aang pops back into the frame at this.)

Aang: Sure! What are curios?
Pirate Barker (pausing): I'm not entirely sure, but we got'em!

(The pirate takes Aang by the shoulders and bustles them onto to the ship. Cut to the three looking around the Pirate's hold, gawping at their wares. Katara is momentarily mesmerized by a stone monkey richly jeweled with large, blood red rubies. Then from o.c., a sinister voice is heard.)

Pirate Captain: I've never seen such a fine specimen of lemur. That beast would fetch me a hefty sum, if you'd be interested in bartering.

(In the midst of speaking, the Pirate Captain enters from a dark doorway. He wears a wide brim hat and has a huge green parrot like creature on his shoulder, which screams several times when the Captain is finished. Cut to Aang, who hugs Momo protectively.)

Aang (defensively): Momo's not for sale.

(Cut to Katara, who walks over to a scroll rack. One of them, the thinnest, has the water symbol on its end. She opens it and sees the instructions on how to perform various waterbending moves. Her eyes light up and she draws an intake of breath as the view zooms backs a bit to reveal Aang behind her.)

Katara: Look at this, Aang! It's a waterbending scroll. Check out these crazy moves!
Aang (to the Pirate Captain): Where did you get a waterbending scroll?

(Cut to a view of the open scroll. The Captain's hand suddenly slams down upon it. Cut to a wider shot of Aang and Katara, the Captain between them rolling up the scroll and smiling.)

Pirate Captain: Let's just say I got it up north at a most reasonable price. Free!

(Cut to a view of the Pirate Captain replacing the scroll in the rack, Katara visible in the background eyeing the scroll hungrily. Cut to Sokka looking at some merchandise, then he turns around, puzzling something out.)

Sokka: Waaait a minute...sea-loving traders...with suspiciously acquired merchandise...and pet reptile birds...You guys are pirates!
Pirate Barker (putting his arm around Sokka's shoulders and smiling): We prefer to think of ourselves as high risk traders.

(Cut to Katara looking at the two measly copper pieces in her hand. She turns to the Pirate Captain.)

Katara: So, how much for the, uh, "traded" scroll?
Pirate Captain: I've already got a buyer, a nobleman in the Earth Kingdom. Unless, of course, you kids have 200 gold pieces on ya right now?

(Aang and Katara withdraw slightly to speak in private. Aang puts his hand out.)

Aang: I know how to deal with these guys, Katara, pirates love to haggle. (She gives him the 2 copper pieces). Watch and learn. Aang walks over the Pirate Captain.) What say to the price of... one copper piece!

(Aang holds the copper piece up to the Captain, a wide grin on his face.)

Pirate Captain: Hahaha! The price is 200 gold pieces. I don't haggle on items this rare.
Aang: Okay – two copper pieces!
Pirate Captain: It's not as amusing the second time, boy.
Katara: Aang, can we get out of here, I feel like we're getting weird looks.
Aang (to the Pirate Captain): Aye, we be castin' off now!

(Aang grabs his staff and follows Katara out. Cut to the three leaving the ship.)

Aang: What was that all about, Katara.
Sokka: Yeh, I was just starting to browse through their boomerang collection.
Katara (hugging herself protectively): I'll just feel a lot better once we get away from here.

(Cut to wide shot showing the dock and the prow of the pirate vessel. The pirate who solicited them originally runs across the deck shouting.)

Pirate Barker: Hey you, get back here!

(Cut to the group who turn to look back.)

Aang: Well, well, look who's come to their senses. Told ya the haggling would pay off.

(Cut to the groups p.o.v. Like angry bees from a beehive the pirates are exiting their ship to come after Aang, Katara and Sokka. Suddenly, the group is faced with a dozen or so well armed and obviously angry pirates. Cut to a terrified Aang, with the others behind him and obviously frightened as well. Fade to commercial break.)



Act II

(The show returns to the face off. The pirates crowd around the kids, yelling things like, "There they are!", "Get'em!" and "Nobody's goin' nowhere!"

Katara: I...I don't think these pirates are here to trade with us!

(The kids run off with the pirates in pursuit.)

Random Pirate: Get back here!

(The kids run down an alley and the pirates split into two groups. One follows the kids while the other, led by the pirate salesmen, goes in another direction.)

Pirate Barker: This way! Let's cut'em off!

(Cut to the three kids turning the corner around a building, pirates in pursuit. As he rounds the corner Sokka skids and yells "whoa!", but they keep going. As she passes the corner, Katara waterbends some water from a nearby stall onto the ground and freezes it. The lead pirate slips and hits the ground. Cut to the same cabbage dealer seen in "The King of Omashu." He is nuzzling a cabbage happily. He puts the cabbage in his portable stand, which is full of cabbages and begins to wheel it away. As he does, Sokka and Katara run by, bumping the cart and knocking off cabbages. The shopkeeper saves the cabbages from hitting the ground, but then Aang launches himself between the cart's canopy and the cabbages and emerges out the other side. As he does, he turns and airbends the cart up the street to strike the pursuing pirates. The cart disappears in a clouds of dust as do the pirates. The cabbage dealer enters the view, back to the screen and clearly irate.)

Cabbage Merchant: My cabbages! (Turning to the camera) This place is worse than Omashu!

(Cut to a view of the pirates who just got knocked out by the cabbage cart. They groan pitifully. Cut to the kids running down another alley, but when they turn the next corner they are met by the pirate salesmen and his men. The kids run back the way they came, the pirates again in pursuit.)

Random Pirate: I hope that lemur of yours has nine lives!

(The kids turn into a blind alley. They turn around to face their pursuers. Cut the to Pirate Barker and his mates now blocking the entrance.)

Pirate Barker (dual wielding a pair of long knives): Now, who gets to take the steel of my blade first?
Aang: No thanks!

(Aang airbends a huge gust of wind at the Pirates, who are blinded with dust and disoriented. Aang begins to rush forward while opening his glider. Katara and Sokka run along behind and then latch onto to Aang's legs.)

Aang: Hold on tight!
Katara: Aang, I thought we were running away from the pirates!
Aang: Just hang on!

(They have trouble gaining altitude at first, in fact they bounce off the heads of many of the pirates they are trying to escape. They eventually get airborne, however, and look back to see the pirates and the port receding behind them. Fade back to the waterfall where the three and Momo stand once again on the river bank. Cut to a closer shot of the three as Aang closes his glider.)

Aang: I used to kinda look up to pirates, but those guys are terrible.
Katara (smiling): I know, that's why I took – this!

(Cut to a close up of the waterbending scroll in Katara outstretched hand. Aang gets up, an unhappy look on his face.)

Aang: No way.
Katara: Isn't it great?
Sokka (entering from right): No wonder they were trying to hack us up. You stole their waterbending scroll.
Katara (self satisfied): I prefer to think of it as "high-risk trading."
Aang (smiling): Haha! Good one, Katara.
Katara: Sokka, where do you think they got it? They stole it from a waterbender.
Sokka: It doesn't matter. You put all of our lives in danger just so you could learn some stupid, fancy splashes!
Katara: These are real waterbending forms. You know how crucial it is for Aang to learn waterbending.
Sokka (turning and walking away): Whatever.
Aang: Well, what's done is done. We have it. We might as well learn from it.

(Screen cuts to long shot of Aang and Katara on river bank as Aang speaks. When he is through, the camera pans up to the sky, where the scene fades to another sky scene, but this one with seagulls. When the view pans back down, Zuko's ship is docked at the village the kids have just left. Cut to Zuko and Iroh in the market area. Zuko's arms are folded across his chest and he stares into the camera, clearly unhappy.)

Iroh: I've checked all the shops on this pier. Not a lotus tile in the entire marketplace.
Zuko (turning to shout at his uncle): It's good to know this trip was a complete waste of time for everyone!
Iroh: Quite the contrary. I always say the only thing better than finding something you were looking for, is finding something you weren't looking for at a great bargain!

(In the middle of Iroh's saying, a parade of Fire Nation soldiers walks by carrying armloads of merchandise that Iroh has just bought. One of them is some kinds of brass musical instrument.)

Zuko: You bought a sumki horn?
Iroh: For music night on the ship. Now, if we only had some woodwinds.

(As they begin walking down the dock, cut to a view of the pirate ship.)

Iroh: This place looks promising!

(Cut to a view of the red jeweled monkey Katara had eyed earlier. Cut to Iroh's face , Zuko visible in the background.)

Iroh: Ooo! That is handsome! Wouldn't it look magnificent in the galley?

(Cut to a view from behind the Pirate Captain, who is speaking with the Pirate Barker that the kids escaped from a few scenes before. Zuko listens to their conversation. Meanwhile, Iroh picks up the jeweled monkey with a huge grin on his face.)

Pirate Barker: We lost the Water Tribe girl and the little bald monk she was traveling with.
Zuko (walking over): This monk, did he have an arrow on his head?

(Iroh makes monkey noises in the background, then fade to a shot of the open waterbending scroll. Katara begins to speak from o.c.)

Katara: I just want to try this one move first and then it's all yours.

(Cut to wider shot of Aang and Katara by the river, with Aang now holding open he scroll for her. She leans backward, assuming the waterbending stance prescribed in the scroll.)

Katara: "The single water whip"... looks doable.

(She raises a stream of water and whips it around, but it hits her in the forehead, leaving a bruise. Sokka, visible over her shoulder sitting cross legged on a rock, laughs.)

Katara: What's so funny?
Sokka: I'm sorry, but you deserve that. (Screen expands to show Aang on the left. Sokka turns to him.) You've been duped. She's only interested in teaching herself.
Katara (guiltily): Aang will get his turn once I figure out the water whip!

(She tries again, but the whip behaves erratically and unintentionally zaps Momo, who screams at her in protest. Cut to wide shot of Katara in the foreground, Aang in the background.)

Katara (angry): Why can't I get this stupid move!
Aang (walking to the river): You'll get it.

(Katara looks displeased at this pronouncement, undoubtedly expecting Aang to show her up once again. Cut to Aang making the water whip correctly on the first try.)

Aang: You just gotta shift your weight through the stances... (He gracefully manipulates the whip for a few seconds and then drops it back into the river.) There. See, the key to bending is...
Katara (angry, shaking her fists in front of her): Will you PLEASE shut your air hole! Believe it or not, your infinite wisdom gets a little old sometimes. Why don't we just throw the scroll away since you're so naturally gifted! (She looks over at Sokka, who is not impressed.) What?

(She looks at Aang, who is frightened and looks on the verge of tears.)

Katara (now abashed): Omigosh, Aang, I'm so sorry. I don't know what came over me. But, you know what, it won't happen again. (She rolls up the scroll and hands it to Aang.) Here, this is yours. I don't want to have anything to do with it anymore.
Aang: It's okay, Katara

(Cut to Sokka still sitting on the rock, Momo in the foreground rubbing his sore behind where the whip struck him.)

Sokka: What about Momo? He's the real victim here.
Katara (stroking his ears as he chitters): I'm sorry Momo.
Sokka (clearly milking the situation): And... what about me? There was that time you –
Katara (angrily again): No more apologies!

(Fade back to a shot of Zuko's ship. The prows opens and deploys a small cutter craft that steams away. Fade to a scene on the river where the cutter craft and the pirate ship are moving up the river in parallel. Cut to a scene on the deck of one of the ships. Zuko and the Pirate Captain, green parrot still on his shoulder, are in conversation.)

Pirate Captain: Shouldn't we stop to search the woods?
Zuko: We don't need to stop. They stole a waterbending scroll, right?
Pirate Captain: Uh huh.
Zuko: Then they'll be on the water.

(Fade to a night scene, the camera focused on the full moon in the sky. The view pans down to the kids camps, fire still blazing. The boys are asleep, but Katara is awake. She gets up and silently removes the scroll from Aang's bag. She backs guiltily away from the camp, turning around only to be confronted by Momo's luminescent green eyes. He is sitting on some sort of tree trunk as he chitters at her.)

Katara (whispering): Shh! Momo, go back to sleep.

(She walks by and he chitters again, but she "sh's" him once more. Fade to Katara by the river practicing, but failing to produce, the water whip.)

Katara (frustrated): Shoot! Come on water, work with me here!

(She lifts a globe of water out of the river and tries to manipulate it, each of her mistakes being punctuated by a verbal exclamation of "okay", "stupid!" or something else. Cut to Zuko and the Pirate Captain on the deck of one of their ships, who are clearly now close enough to hear this noise. They look at each other, then cut back to Katara wielding a stream of water.)

Katara: Okay, Katara, shift your weight through the stances...(the stream collapses)...ugh!

(Suddenly she hears the noise of grinding metal. She runs over to a row of bushes on her left and parts them to reveal Zuko's cutter craft now beached on the river bank. She turns to run, but there stands a pirate, who grabs her.)

Katara: No, let go of me!

(She bends a water whip around and smacks the pirate in the face. He lets her go, but she runs right into Zuko's arms, who holds her fast.)

Zuko: I'll save you from the pirates.

(Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(When the show returns, Katara is bound to the trunk of a small tree, her hands behind the trunk. She is surrounded by the pirates and Zuko's soldiers.)

Zuko: Tell me where he is and I won't hurt you or your brother.
Katara: Go jump in the river!
Zuko (trying to be reasonable): Try to understand, I need to capture to restore something I've lost. My honor. Perhaps in exchange I can restore something you've lost.

(Cut to a shot of Katara's neck, where suddenly her mother's necklace appears. The shot expands to reveal Zuko holding it in place and shock moving across Katara's features. Zuko walks away with the necklace.)

Katara: My mother's necklace! How did you get that?
Zuko: I didn't steal it, if that's what you're wondering. Tell me where he is.
Katara: No!
Pirate Captain (walking forward): Enough of this necklace garbage. You promised the scroll!
Zuko (producing the scroll and making fire in his hand beneath it): I wonder how much money this is worth? (The pirates gasp and some cry, "no!"). A lot, apparently. Now you help me find what I want, you'll get this back and everyone goes home happy. Search the woods for the boy and meet back here.
Pirate Captain (sullen): Fine.

(Cut back to a dawn scene at the waterfall. A shot of the waterfall is replaced by Aang and Sokka still sleeping. Sokka rolls over, starting to wake. He notices Katara's empty sleeping bag in the foreground.)

Sokka: Huh? Where did she go? (Cut to Sokka searching Aang's bag, Aang waking up in the foreground.) I don't believe it.
Aang (yawning): What's wrong.
Sokka: She took the scroll! She's obsessed with that thing. It's just a matter of time before she gets us all in deep –

(He is cut off when his hands get wrapped in a sling thrown from off-screen. He is pulled right off his sleeping bag screaming. He lands on the ground and is faced by a pirate who throws another sling at him. He rolls out of the way, picks up his spear and charges the intruder. Aang, in the background, turns to see a huge beefy pirate hefting two crossbows with a net tied between them. He aims and fires. Aang fires an air ball at the approaching net, but the air passes right through it. The net rolls him up into a nice neat bundle and he is thrown backwards onto the ground, where another pirate begins dragging him away. They instantly leave Sokka alone, who gets up, his pride hurt.)

Random Pirate: I got him, come on!
Sokka: Oh, what? I'm not good enough to kidnap?

(He is answered by another net which scoops him up. He screams as they drag him towards the camera and then o.c. Cut to a view of the pirate ship beached on the river bank, the pirates, Zuko and his men lined up facing each other. Katara is still bound to the tree, Iroh standing next to her. The pirates have Sokka and Aang tied up, Zuko holds the scroll.)

Zuko: Nice work.
Katara: Aang, this is all my fault.
Aang: No, Katara it isn't.
Iroh: Yeh, it kind of is.

(Cut to Zuko's face.)

Zuko: Give me the boy.
Pirate Captain: You give us the scroll.
Sokka: You're really gonna hand over the Avatar for a stupid piece of parchment!?
Zuko (pointing at Sokka): Don't listen to him! He's trying to turn us against each other.
Pirate Captain (looking at Aang): Your friend is the Avatar?
Sokka (appearing at the Captain's side): Sure is, and I'll bet he'll fetch a lot more on the black market then that fancy scroll.
Zuko: Shut your mouth, you water tribe peasant!
Aang (concerned): Yeh, Sokka, you really should shut your mouth...
Sokka (looking sweetly at the obviously very interested pirates): I'm just sayin', it's bad business sense. Just imagine how much the Fire Lord would pay for the Avatar. You guys would be set for life!

(Cut to a wide shot of the two opposing groups. The Pirate Captain points to Zuko.)

Pirate Captain: Keep the scroll! We can buy a hundred with the reward we will get for the kid.

(The pirates begin to walk away with the kids. Cut to Zuko's face.)

Zuko: You'll regret breaking a deal with me!

(Zuko and the guards on either side of him unleash a torrent of flame, which bathes the ground underneath the pirates who jump out the way. General melee begins. The Pirate Salesmen jumps into the midst of the firebenders with a cry. Zuko and his men bear down on the still bound Aang and Sokka. As the get near, four pirates jump into the frame to defend their captives. They drop smoke bombs and the battlefield instantly becomes a foggy mess. The remaining Fire Nation soldiers approaches the edge of the crowd and are instantly pulled in by the arms of pirates emerging from the smoke. Cut to an overhead shot of Katara still bound to the tree. Momo climbs down the trunk and chew open her bonds.)

Katara (smiling): Thanks, Momo. I owe you a bushel of apples.

(Cut to Aang running through the smoke, coughing, his hands still bound. Near misses with a throwing star and a spear cut Aang's bonds. Cut to the exterior of the smoke cloud where Zuko emerges. He puts the waterbending scroll through his waistband on his back. He turns around to just avoid a sword stroke. Zuko assumes a firebending stance, then cut to the Pirate Captain pointing a sword at him. They struggle, but no one gains advantage. From off-screen a sling removes the scroll from Zuko's waistband. Cut to the pirate who threw the sling. Momo intercepts the sling as it returns to the pirate and takes the scroll, flying o.c.. Momo in turn is pursued by the Pirate Captain's green parrot, which tackles Momo in mid-air. The lemur drops the scroll and it falls back down into the smoke filled battlefield, jets of flame erupting from it at various points. Cut to Sokka crawling on the ground, the sound of steel on steel all around him. Out of the smoke a machete buries itself in the ground in front Sokka, scaring him. He uses its blade to cut his arm bonds.)

Sokka: Aang, are you there?

(Cut to Aang airbending himself up over the smoke cloud, then dropping back down.)

Aang: I'm over here, follow my voice!
Sokka (from o.c.): Where? I can't find you!
Aang: I'm right here!

(The Avatar assumes an airbending stance and blows away the smoke from the immediate area to reveal a mix of Fire Nation soldiers and pirate in combat. They freeze and look at him. He closes the smoke back up around them.)

Aang: Uhh, never mind! I'll find you!

(Cut to Sokka crawling out of the smoke and getting up. As he does, Aang jumps out of the smoke over Sokka's head.)

Aang: Run!

(They run towards the pirate ship, which Katara is trying to push off the beach.)

Aang: Katara! You're okay!
Katara: Help me get this boat back in the water so we can get out of here!

(All three begin to push on the boat, but nothing happens. They stop and look up at the prow.)

Sokka: We need a team of rhinos to budge this ship.
Aang: A team of rhinos... or two waterbenders.

(Katara looks at Aang and smiles. Cut to Aang and Katara pulling the river back and forth up the beach, slowly raising the water level around the prow. The ship floats.)

Katara: Everybody in!

(Cut back to the duel between Zuko and the Pirate Captain. Iroh breaks it up.)

Iroh: Are you so busy fighting you cannot see your own ship has set sail?
Zuko: We have no time for your proverbs, Uncle!
Iroh (pointing o.c.): It's no proverb.

(Cut to a quick shot of the pirate ship sailing downriver, then back the Captain, Zuko and Iroh.)

Pirate Captain: Bleeding hog-monkeys! (He runs o.c..)
Zuko: Haha!

(Cut to pirate ship, now far away, as the screen pans left to reveal Zuko's ship following it, loaded with pirates, one of whom moves to moon Zuko and his Uncle, but is cut off by shift back to Zuko and Iroh.)

Zuko: Hey! That's my boat! (He runs o.c.)
Iroh (scratching his chin): Maybe it should be a proverb.
Zuko (from o.c.): Come on, Uncle!

(Cut to shot of Aang's back. He looking astern at the pirates as the close in. He turns to yell forward.)

Aang: Sokka! Can't you make it go any faster?

(Cut to Aang's p.o.v, showing Sokka's back as he stands at the wheel of the ship).

Sokka: I don't know how. This thing wasn't made by the water tribe.

(Cut back to side view of Aang, where the smokestack of the cutter ship is visible in the background. The pirates are passing them. When they draw parallel, pirates begins jumping onto the kid's ship. Cut to a view of the aft deck, where Katara faces the camera in the background and two pirates advance on her in the foreground. As she backs up, Aang, who is visible on top of the cabin, waterbends a huge wave onto the deck that washes one of the pirates overboard. Katara, afraid at first, but then gaining confidence and determination in her continence, creates a water whip and smacks the other one overboard. Cut to Katara, beaming, Aang visible in the background still on top of the cabin.)

Aang: Hey, you did the water whip!
Katara: I couldn't have done it without your help!

(Cut to Sokka on the bridge with a beefy pirate and the pirate salesmen on him.)

Sokka: Will you two quit congratulating each other and help me out!

(Momo flies across the screen at this point, closely pursued by the Captain's parrot. The pursuit ends when Momo traps the parrot by wrapping him in the pirate vessel's black flag. Cut back to Sokka being held aloft by the beefy pirate. Sokka screams as the pirate throws him into the sail in front of him. Sokka falls with a thud to the deck below.)

Pirate Barker: That's good!

(Aang drops into the scene from the left and throws the Pirate Salesmen threw the guard rail and o.c. with a huge blast of air. He twirls the beefy pirate around on a whirlwind of air for a few minutes before ejecting him high into the air. He comes back down in the background, landing with a splash in the river. Cut to a view from the floor of the foredeck, Sokka's supine form in the foreground, Katara and Aang visible on the bridge deck above. Aang jumps down to Sokka.)

Katara (pointing forward): Aang, look!

(The sound of falling water is heard as she speaks. Cut to p.o.v. down the river looking back upriver at the ships. Camera zooms out to reveal that they are rapidly approaching a large waterfall. Cut back to Aang as the screen expands to reveal the Pirate Barker behind him.)

Aang: Oh, no!

(The Pirate Barker draws his blade, making a distinctive sound. Aang turns to face him and draws his bison whistle in response. He blows the whistle furiously to no seeming effect. Cut back to the unimpressed Pirate Barker, who is promptly round-kicked overboard by Sokka who has just entered the shot from the right.)

Sokka (tapping the side of his head): Have you lost your mind!? This is no time for flute practice!

(Cut to Katara and Aang looking over the starboard railing at the rapidly approaching waterfall. Cut to a view of the prow almost at the lip of the fall. Katara speaks from o.c.)

Katara: We can stop the boat! Aang, together, push and pull the water!

(Cut to Katara and Aang on the foredeck waterbending in unison, making pushing and pulling motions. Cut to overhead shot of the boat, which is now turning around right at the lip of the fall.)

Katara: It's working! It's slowing down!

(Cut to Aang and Katara bending, then back to the ship which is now at a 90 degree angle to the lip of the fall and motionless. Cut back a side shot of Aang and Katara, Sokka in the background. Beyond Sokka, the smokestack of the cutter can be seen growing larger.)

Katara: We're doing it!
Sokka (pointing to the cutter): But we have another problem!

(The camera zooms over the railing to show a close of the cutter bearing down on the pirate ship. Cut to a view of the pirate ship hovering at the lip of the fall from the p.o.v. of someone sitting on the river bank. From the left the cutter enters the scream and rams the pirate ship amidships. Cut back to the kids who yell "whoa!" at he impact, which lifts the starboard side of the pirate ship out of the water and, consequently, making the ship list badly to port. The list rapidly becomes so bad that the three fall off the ship and over the falls, the pirate ship falling behind them. Cut to the three falling. Appa swoops in and they land on his backs. He exits just in time to avoid the falling pirate ship. Cut to a wide shot of the waterfall from its base. The pirate ship disintegrates when its hits the bottom in a cloud of water and debris. Appa and the kids swoop out of the scene. Cut to a close up of the bison whistle, then zoom backwards to reveal the kids on Appa's back, Momo landing on Sokka's shoulder in the background.)

Aang: I knew a bison whistle would come in handy. Thanks, Appa.
Sokka: Yeh, we owe ya one.

(Cut to Appa's face. He grunts back to them. Then cut to Zuko running up to the river bank near the waterfall, Iroh huffing and puffing behind him.)

Zuko: My boat!
Iroh (finally regaining his breath): Hehe, Prince Zuko, you're really going to get a kick out of this. The missing lotus tile was in my sleeve the whole time!

(He produces the missing lotus tile with a huge smile on his face. Cut to wide shot of Iroh still holding out the piece, Zuko trying to control his breathing and his temper. Cut back to Iroh holding the piece, which disappears fast as lightning when Zuko snatches it from him. Zuko throws it as far as he can. Cut to the pirates floating downstream. The piece lands on the Pirate Barker's head. Cut to a long shot of Aang breaking through the clouds.)

Katara: Aang, I still owe you an apology. (Cut to the three in the saddle, Katara kneeling and looking down at nothing.) You were just so good at waterbending without really trying. I got so competitive that I put us all in danger. I'm sorry.
Aang: That's okay, Katara.
Katara: Besides, who needs that stupid scroll anyway.

(Pan left to reveal Sokka's hand holding the scroll.)

Sokka: Is that really how you feel?
Katara: The scroll!

(She reaches for it, but Sokka pulls it away and gives her the heisman with his other hand.)

Sokka: First, what did you learn?
Katara: Stealing is wrong. (She takes the scroll.) Unless it's from pirates!
Aang: Haha! Good one, Katara.

(Cut to Appa flying off into the clouds. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(OPEN on a pale blue sky, panning down to reveal the tops of a vast deciduous forest. The trees are blanketed in leaves of fiery reds and oranges; there is just a hint of green left on one or two. The air is alive with the CHIRRPS and WHIRRS of insects. The pan stops on wide branch. A little yellow beetle scuttles from around the backside of the branch, toward the trunk. The bug is suddenly covered in a rapidly growing shadow as MOMO swoops in from above. Before he can catch it, the beetle's carapace opens like a ladybug's, and it flies off while he peeks under his paws to see if he got it. Discovering he hasn't, Momo leaps after it.

Cut to the forest from just below canopy level, looking up. The beetle flies up the tree trunk with Momo climbing in pursuit and CHITTERING. They ring the tree then descend.

Cut to the base of the tree. A pile of slightly lumpy red nuts sits in the foreground. The beetle enters from OC and lands on the ground. Momo lands in a pounce from the same direction, but once again the beetle flies off before he can catch it. He watches it, then notices the fruit.

The camera pulls back to reveal the neat pile of about a dozen or so apple-like nuts sitting on a pile of leaves. Other than the leaf pile, the ground is bare dirt. Momo's ears prick straight up.

Cut to the little clearing with the pile of fruit. Momo pounces on it from OC. Suddenly, copper-colored slats snap up from the leaves and surround him in a globe. The snare's slats run longitudinally; the “poles” are parallel to the ground. The globe shifts so that the ‘north pole' is on top and the camera pans up into the canopy as the snare and its cargo spring into the air, where two other snares hang.

Cut to a place just below canopy level. Momo's snare comes to a jerking stop at about the same level in the air as the two other snares. They are also occupied: large brown baboon-like animals BARK noisily, as they hold onto the slats like prison bars and pull on them. The momentum of the ascent leaves Momo's snare—and Momo—spinning.

Cut to another clearing in the forest. Between trees AANG, KATARA, SOKKA and APPA are visible at the far end, taking a break from travel.)

Aang: Where's Momo?

(Momo's yowl echoes through the forest.

Cut to Aang standing in the foreground with Katara and Sokka sitting on the ground. They look around, trying to tell where the call came from.

Fade to the clearing with the snares, looking up from ground level. Aang wanders in from OC, drawn by Momo's urgent CALLS. With a sweep of his arms, He airbends to leap, climbing to Momo's height by rebounding up off close-by tree trunks.)

Aang: Hang on Momo!

(Cut to a tree branch. It extends out of a main part of the tree. Attached to the trunk is a small winch. A rope enters the winch from lower on the trunk OC, then continues up to an eyeloop bolt attached to the underside of the branch, before hanging straight down. Aang ascends in from OC. He sits, then flips over the branch and dangles beneath it like an acrobat on a trapeze. He grabs the rope, releases a latch on the winch, and carefully feeds more line.

Cut to the ground, as Sokka and Katara ease the snare down to the ground between them and together pull the squeaky slats apart enough to make an exit. Momo immediately hops out and runs to the foreground to finish a handful of the nuts, his peril forgotten. Sokka and Katara release the snare, and Sokka GROANS and slaps his forehead at the lack of gratitude. Aang jumps down from above and looks up. Sokka and Katara also look up.

Cut to the other two snares. The Hog Monkeys in them MOAN pleadingly. The traps are suspended near each other on a different branch.)

Aang: All right—you too.

(He crouches, then springs up in a spiraling column of airbent wind that carries him up to the camera and OC. Sokka reaches behind.)

Sokka: This is gonna take forever.

(Sokka throws his boomerang in one fluid move; with a WHIZ it zips up and OC.

Just below the branch, the ropes come from opposite directions, but they parallel each other as they hang down from curved staples. With a WHIZ, the boomerang enters and exists the scene, cutting the both ropes in the process. The ropes fall away; There's the sound of CRASHES and panicked beast BARKS.

The camera pans slightly as Aang arrives from OC: he's hanging below the branch and hugging it as he inches over to the first staple. He pauses to look upside-down at the ground below.)

Aang: That works...

(On the ground, the hog monkeys are loose; their cages like open clamshells. They walk on all fours to the foreground. One disappears between the framing trees, the other climbs up the tree framing the left and disappears. Sokka approaches one of the busted snares and kneels to examine it, as Aang enters by skidding down the trunk and root of a tree in the background.)

Sokka: These are Fire Nation traps—you can tell from the metalwork. We'd better pack up camp, and get moving.

(Sokka's hands pull taught the bindings on a roll of gear.

Cut to the clearing from over Aang's shoulder. Katara hands a gear roll up to Aang, who is sitting on Appa's head. Sokka sees this. He leaves his roll and walks over to them.)

Sokka: Ah-ah...no flying this time.
Katara: What?

(Aang hands the roll to Sokka, who puts it on the ground.)

Aang: Why wouldn't we fly?
Sokka: Think about it. Somehow Prince Zuko and the Fire Nation keep finding us. It's because they spot Appa—he's just too noticeable.
Katara: What! Appa's not too noticeable!
Sokka: He's a gigantic fluffy monster with an arrow on his head—it's kinda hard to miss him!

(Appa turns his head and GROANS at Sokka. Aang is in the ‘driver's seat' holding his reigns.)

Aang (gently to Appa): Sokka's just jealous ‘cause he doesn't have an arrow.
Sokka (to Aang OC): I know you all want to fly, but my instincts tell me we should play it safe this time and walk.
Katara: Who made you the boss?
Sokka: I'm not the boss—I'm the leader.
Katara (incredulous): You're the leader? But your voice still cracks!
Sokka: I'm the oldest and I'm a warrior. (tries to speak deeper) So...I'm the leader!
Katara: If anyone's the leader, it's Aang. I mean, he is the Avatar.
Sokka: Are you kidding—he's just a goofy kid!

(Cut to Aang, dangling from Appa's horn: upside-down by his hands with his legs sticking out into space. Appa looks rather unimpressed.)

Aang: He's right.

(Cut to Katara and Sokka again. Sokka has his pack on his back.)

Katara: Why do boys always think someone has to be the leader? I bet you wouldn't be so bossy if you kissed a girl.
Sokka: I-I've kissed a girl—you...just haven't met her.
Katara: Who? Gran-gran? I've met Gran-gran.
Sokka: No—besides Gran-gran. Look, my instincts tell me we have a better chance of slipping through on foot and a leader has to trust his instincts.
Katara: Okay, we'll try it your way Oh Wise Leader.

(Aang steps over, now wearing a backpack. Momo is sitting on the top.)

Aang: Who knows—walking might be fun.

(Cut to the forest. Between trees the group trudges along, with Sokka in front, followed by Aang/Momo, Katara and Appa)

Aang: Walking stinks! How do people go anywhere without a flying bison?
Katara: I don't know Aang. Why don't you ask Sokka's instincts—they seem to know everything.
Sokka: Ha ha. Very funny.
Aang: I'm tired of carrying this pack.
Katara: You know who you should ask to carry it for a while? Sokka's Instincts!
Aang: That's a great idea! Hey, Sokka's Instincts, would you mind—
Sokka: Okay, okay—I get it. Look guys, I'm tired too. But the important thing is that-- (He pushes the branches from two rust red-leafed bushes and holds them, focussing his attention on Aang and Katara.) --we're safe from...the— (He finally turns around to see what's beyond the bushes.) --Fire...Nation...

(Sokka, Aang Katara and Momo have just walked into a clearing with a Fire Nation encampment in it. On the opposite end of the clearing are three Pavilion tents, and an active fire pit with logs as benches on two sides. The camp is occupied.

Cut to the reaction of the soldiers—most of them seated or crouching near the fire with bowls in hand. The surprise of others. On a couple of soldiers seated closest to the tents, which have doorflaps with the Fire Nation emblem on them. One of these soldiers has a patch over his left eye.

Back to Momo and the Trio.)

Sokka: RUN!

(As they drop their packs, The soldiers leap up from the logs, swords out. The one-eyed soldier takes a bender's stance and launches a fist-full of fire at them. The fire misses them—mostly—but sets the bushes behind them alight.)

Sokka: We're cut off! (Meanwhile, the left sleeve of his tunic is on fire.)
Aang: Sokka, your shirt!

(Sokka looks, and YELLS in panic.

Katara uncorks a skin container and begins to bend the contents—water—into a flowing ribbon. The ribbon splashes against Sokka's tunic, putting it out. Katara redirects the ribbon back into the waterskin and replaces the cap.

The trio is surrounded: the burning bushes behind them, the soldiers all around. They put their backs together and face the warriors, ready to fight if necessary.)

Sokka: If you let us pass, we promise not to hurt you.
Katara (quietly): What are you doing?
Sokka: Bluffing?

(The One-eyed Captain smiles from his lines.)

Captain: You? Promise not to hurt us?

(There is a quiet ZIP and THUD. The Captain looks surprised for a moment, then groans and collapses face first on the ground. His men lower their weapons a little.)

Aang: Nice work, Sokka! How'd ya do that?
Sokka: Uh...instinct?
Katara: Look!

(She points to somewhere above. Blur to a figure standing on the massive branch of a nearby tree. The person drops something and draws two blades from the middle of his back.. He steps off the back of the branch, his weapons held high. Instead of falling straight down, the weapons seem to catch on the branch, allowing him to sling himself in the direction of the camp. The stranger kicks over two of the soldiers farthest from the Trio; he lands with a foot on each of their backs.

He is JET. He is a young man—about Sokka's age. Except for a red vest, he's dressed from neck to toe in dark green clothing. What little armor he has (shoulder caps and hip/upper thigh covers) are mismatched. He has a shaggy mane of brown hair, and a twig held in his teeth.

He rushes forward, his shuang gou (twin hook sword) in each hand. He hooks a leg each on another pair of soldiers and sends them head over heels. With a polished body flip, he launches them through the air. They end up in a heap on top of their prone captain.
Jet lands on his feet, ready for more.)

Jet: Down you go.

(The trio looks up from the little pile-up at him. They've gone from surprise to varying degrees of pleasure (Katara) awe (Aang) and incredulity (Sokka).

A soldier rushes up from behind Jet, sword raised. The young man hooks his opponent's sword hand as he spins. Jet finishes where he started—ready to face a new opponent—while his opponent is sent flying. The man lands at the feet of a quartet of sword holders. The closest then looks up.)

Soldier: They're in the trees!

(A small boy drops from above and lands on the soldier's shoulders, then spins his helmet around, blinding him. He staggers off, his small attacker still on his shoulders and laughing all the while. Before the remaining three swordsmen can react, arrows ZIP from above, disarming each man without hurting him.

Blur up to the archer sitting on a branch. He reaches for a quiver on his back and fits two arrows to the string of his bow. The archer swings backward, until he is hanging beneath the branch by his knees. He lets his arrows fly.

Cut to another quartet of soldiers. The foremost two have their swords knocked from their hands by the arrows, while an individual leaps from a low branch to the ground.
As the two disarmed soldiers run off, a swordsman charges the newcomer. This freedom fighter ducks, lets the swordsman run into (and across) his back, and tosses his opponent up onto the branch with a shrug. The second swordsman is more cautious, but with speed and strength the rebel grabs him, spins him around and throws him. The barehanded rebel turns and heads for new targets before his old one hits the ground. Meanwhile, a boy with a knife and red facepaint drops to the foreground and runs off to fight.

Cut to Jet, who watches over his shoulder as Katara uses her water to take on an OC foe and beside her Aang bends the air, dragging two soldiers in a dusty circle around the pair.

Cut to Sokka, boomerang raised in both hands, shouting a war cry. A soldier charges him, but before they meet Jet enters the scene. He uses his swords to pole vault him into the chest of the swordsman, who goes flying in the opposite direction OC. Sokka stops shouting and sags out of his battle stance.)

Sokka: Hey, he was mine!
Jet: Gotta be quicker next time.

(Jet turns and rejoins the battle. Katara is left impressed, while a grumpy Sokka walks off.

Cut to two soldiers backing towards the forest, but before they can escape, a massive rebel drops to the ground. As they turn to face him, their faces register shock as he comes out of his drop crouch...and towers above them. Quickly however, they recover and take a battle stance. The grinning giant simply reaches over his shoulder and pulls out a log thicker than a man's leg. He raises it two-handed over his head, and with a growl lowers the boom.

Jet turns from his current opponent to watch the two swordsman backing away, their swords bent beyond use. They drop them and flee. He grins and turns to face the determined spearman. The man jabs for his throat, but he catches the spearshaft with the hooks of his swords. They struggle for a moment, before Jet spins and sidesteps the spear. With one sword free, he hooks the man, who goes flying. The soldier's spear is also sent flying. Its butt-end strikes the back of a nearby swordsman's helmet, knocking him out. The sagging soldier reveals his opponent to be Sokka, ready to receive an attack with his war club. He looks at the downed man.)

Sokka (frustrated): Man!

(Another spearman attempts to strike at Jet from behind. Just in time Jet catches the spearpoint in the space between the grip and the crescent-shaped guard of his sword and redirects it away from his head. The soldier quickly follows the spear, pushing it free and facing the young man again with a flourish. Jet also quickly recovers his stance. Jet catches the speartip with his hooks this time and angles the spear into the ground. He runs up it, leaps, kicks off the back of the soldier's helmet and stumbles a few steps forward before stopping in front of Katara as if he'd meant to do all of it.)

Jet (nonchalantly): Hey.
Katara: Hi.

(Together they turn to take in the camp, now deserted by all but the newcomers.)

Aang (awed): You just took out a whole army almost single-handed!
Sokka: Army? Pfft. There were only, like, twenty guys!
Jet: My name is Jet, and these are my Freedom Fighters. Sneers-- (The Weaponless rebel, who is eating from one of the soldier's bowls) --Longshot (The archer; he raises his paddy-hat covered head at his name) --Smellerbee (The rebel with the facepaint and knife. His knife between his teeth, a captured Fire Nation Sword slung across his back and he has one in each hand. He brandishes them when Jet names him) --The Duke and Pipsqueak. (They are standing next to each other. The Duke is the littlest rebel, the one who rode the soldier's shoulders. He raises his quarterstaff slightly at his name. Pipsqueak is the giant, who puts his log away as his name is called.)

(Aang walks up to the Duke and Pipsqueak.)

Aang (to the Duke, chuckling): Pipsqueak—that's a funny name.

(The Duke sniffles, his nose is runny and his helmet hides shed tears. Pan up to the "real" Pipsqueak, slightly glowering. He bends down.)

Pipsqueak: You think my name is funny?

(Aang looks a little nervous. He plasters a smile on his face.)

Aang: It's hilarious.

(Back on Pipsqueak, who goes from glower to guffaw in a heartbeat. Aang, Pipsqueak and the Duke share the laugh together. Pipsqueak slaps Aang on the back, which unintentionally knocks the Avatar flat. The Duke stops laughing, but smiles again when Aang looks up and chuckles weakly: all among friends. FADE OUT.)



Act II

(FADE IN on the Fire Nation camp. The central fire is out, and members of Jet's freedom fighters are near it, checking weapons (Longshot) or investigating supply crates (Sneers). Sokka watches as Smellerbee passes him with an armful of staves.

Jet is reclining against the trunk of a tree on the perimeter of the camp. Katara approaches.)

Katara: Um...thanks for saving us Jet. We were lucky you were there.
Jet: I should be thanking you. We were waiting to ambush those soldiers all morning—we just needed the right distraction. And then you guys stumbled in.
Katara: We were relying on instincts.
Jet: You'll get yourself killed doing that.

(Sokka is close enough to hear the conversation. He closes his eyes in frustration at his bad call and walks away. Behind him, Pipsqueak and the Duke investigate the inside of a barrel next to one of the pavilion tents. The Duke reaches in and pulls away a finger coated with green goo. He sniffs it experimentally.)

The Duke: Hey Jet—these barrels are filled with blasting jelly.
Jet: That's a great score.

(Pipsqueak holds up a large crate.)

Pipsqueak: And these boxes are filled with jelly candy!
Jet: Also good. Let's not get those mixed up.

(Aang and Momo watch Pipsqueak, the Duke and Sneers loading up a four-wheeled wagon.)

Pipsqueak: We'll take the stuff back to the hideout.
Aang: You guys have a hideout?
Jet: You wanna see it?

(Katara literally slides up to him from OC. Her hands are clasped together; she's practically begging.)

Katara: Yes we wanna see it!

(Cut to Jet's face. His brow softens, but his self-assured smile never wavers.

Fade to everyone walking along the forest floor. Pipsqueak pulls the laden wagon next to Appa. The trunks are massive enough to make even Appa small. In front, Jet has stopped)

Jet: We're here.
Sokka: Where...there's nothing here!
Jet: Hold this.

(Jet hands Sokka a rope with a loop on the end. The other end is somewhere above them.)

Sokka: Why...what's this do?

(The loop ends up around Sokka's wrist. Without warning, he is pulled up by his arm into a nearby tree canopy. As a final insult, Sokka gets momentarily stuck in the leafy branches before he disappears.)

Sokka: Woah!

(Jet offers a similar rope to Aang and Momo.)

Jet: Aang?
Aang: I'll get up on my own.

(Momo launches himself from Aang's shoulder. Aang follows with an Airbender leap. Jet holds a rope and offers his free hand to Katara.)

Jet: Grab hold of me Katara.

(She takes his hand. The colors take on a softer quality as he pulls her into a spin that ends with her against his chest. She blushes noticeably. The rope slowly pulls them into the air, the embrace Katara's only means of support. She smiles nervously then looks around and up at Jet. He focuses on their ascent: the handsome heroic rogue.

Cut to a plank-covered platform high in the canopy. Color is back to normal. Jet and Katara rise through a hole in the 'floor' then land on it with a jump when jet lets go of the still ascending rope. Wooden stairs spiral up the trunk and suspension bridge links their platform to elsewhere. All workmanship is of 'treehouse' quality.

Aang and Momo slide across the scene on a foreground rope.)

Aang: Nice place you got!

(As Jet and Katara walk towards the bridge, the shot pans to reveal several nearby trees have the same platforms, stairs and bridges. Several platforms have tent-like huts.

Cut to Jet and Katara surveying the parts of the tree village below them.)

Katara: It's beautiful up here!
Jet: It's beautiful...and more importantly the Fire Nation can't find us.

(Smellerbee releases his rope and lands near them.)

Smellerbee: They would love to find you. Wouldn't they, Jet?
Jet: It's not gonna happen, Smellerbee.

(A couple of sentries watch from above as Momo and Aang zipline by again. The others are walking along a bridge.)

Katara: Why does the Fire Nation want to find you?
Jet: I guess you could say I've been causing them a little trouble. See, they took over a nearby Earth Kingdom town a few years back.

(cut to Jet and Katara leading the group. Pipsqueak is right behind.)

Pipsqueak: We've been ambushin' their troops, cutting off their supply lines, and doing anything we can to mess with ‘em.

(Sokka is doing his level best to see over Pipsqueak—he keeps hopping to get a peek over the giant's shoulders.)

Jet: One day, we'll drive the Fire Nation out of here for good and free that town.
Katara: That's so brave.

(Sokka comes up from behind—he's somehow made it past Pipsqueak.)

Sokka (Sarcastically): Yeah, nothing's braver than a guy in a treehouse.
Katara: Don't pay any attention to my brother.
Jet: No problem. He probably had a rough day.
Katara: So, you all live here?

(Sokka, ignored, sinks back behind them.)

Jet: That's right. Longshot over there? (cut to Longshot and the Duke walking silently. Longshot's head is slightly bowed) His town got burned down by the fire Nation. And we found the Duke trying to steal our food. I don't think he ever really had a home.
Katara: What about you?

(Jet stops. The group, except for Katara moves on.)

Jet: Fire Nation killed my parents. I was only eight years old. That day changed me forever.
Katara: Sokka and I lost our mother to the Fire Nation.
Jet: I'm so sorry, Katara.

(Fade from the two of them alone on the suspension bridge, looking out, to the blue sky above the canopy. A cloud of cawing birds is disturbed as Appa raises his head through the dense leafy branches with a grumble.

In the hideout below, Ropes with Glowing lanterns hang between branches. Sentries keep watch on several upper platforms while the group sits at a banquet table on a huge platform.

While the group eating and drinking. Jet stands and climbs onto the table.)

Jet: Today, we struck another blow against the Fire Nation swine.

(His followers at the table and on upper platforms cheer. Katara and Aang watch with smiles, Sokka looks grumpy.)

Jet: I got a special joy from the look on one soldier's face, when the Duke dropped down on his helmet and rode him like a wild hog monkey.

(The helmet-less Duke is sitting on the platform between Longshot and Smellerbee. He stands, joins Jet on the table and amid cheers takes a victory walk around a fish platter.)

Jet: Now, the Fire Nation thinks they don't have to worry about a couple of kids hiding in the trees. (He prepares to take a drink from his wooden cup) Maybe they're right.

(His followers BOO at that.)

Jet: Or maybe...they are dead wrong.

(His face is bathed in an angry red from the lanterns. His followers CHEER wildly. He leaves the table and sits on the platform between Sokka and Katara)

Katara: Hey Jet, nice speech.
Jet: Thanks. By the way, I was really impressed with you and Aang. That was some great bending I saw out there today.
Katara: Well, he's great. He's the Avatar. I could use some more training. (She blushes.)
Jet: Avatar huh? Very nice.
Aang: Thanks Jet.
Jet: So I might know a way that you and Aang can help in our struggle.
Sokka: Unfortunately we have to leave tonight. (He stands and walks away.)
Jet: Sokka, you're kidding me! I needed you on an important mission tomorrow.

(Sokka stops, and turns.)

Sokka: What mission?

(Fade to the top of the forest the next day. Jet and Sokka are perched in branches on the same tree. Jet cups his hands and makes a whistle like a birdcall; several trees down Pipsqueak and Smellerbee step into view from their branches. There is a reply call.

Sokka rams his jawbone knife into the trunk of the tree.)

Jet: What are you doing?
Sokka: Shh...it amplifies vibrations.
Jet (impressed): Good trick.

(Sokka cups his hands around the pommel ‘bone' and puts his ear to it.)

Sokka: Nothing yet. (Lowers his voice) Wait! Yes, someone's approaching.
Jet (low voice): How many?
Sokka: I think there's just one.

(Jet whistles again.)

Jet: Good work, Sokka. Ready your weapon.

(Sokka pulls the knife out of the tree and waits. His eyes go wide when the 'someone' comes into view: a stooped OLD MAN with a cane. He wears a simple red robe.)

Sokka (Low): Wait! False alarm...he's just an old man.

(Jet stands and extends his hook swords anyway, then leaps to the ground in front of the traveler. Sokka watches with horror.)

Jet: What are you doing in our woods, you leech.
Old Man: Please sir, I'm just a traveler.

(Jet takes a step, and with one swipe of his sword sends the man's can flying from his hand. The old man backs away, but when he tries to flee the way he came, he runs face first into Pipsqueak's chest. The force of the impact knocks him to the ground; the giant looms over him. He tries to crawl away, but Pipsqueak's foot on his backside effectively pins him.)

Jet: Do you like destroying towns? Do you like destroying families? Do you?!
Old Man (frightened): Oh...please let me go...have mercy...
Jet: Does the Fire Nation let people go?! Does the Fire Nation have mercy?!

(Jet winds up a kick, but his foot is snagged by Sokka's club before it can be delivered. Sokka releases him)

Sokka: Jet, he's just an old man!
Jet: He's Fire Nation! Search him!

(Pipsqueak holds the prisoner and Smellerbee steps up)

Sokka: But he's not hurting anyone!
Jet: Have you forgotten that the Fire Nation killed your mother? Remember why you fight!
Smellerbee: We've got his stuff, Jet. (He holds up a shoulder satchel the old man was carrying. The old man is back on the ground.)
Sokka: This doesn't feel right.
Jet: It's what has to be done—now let's get outta here.

(Jet pushes past Sokka. Pipsqueak and Smellerbee follow. Sokka looks at the old man still on his hands and knees.)

Jet: Come on Sokka!

(Sokka slowly turns then runs after the others.

At the hideout, Aang and Momo are playing with the ziplines again. He leaps to a platform.)

Aang: Sokka! Look what the Duke gave me!

(Aang is wearing a satchel—not the old man's—and pulls a small pellet from it. With a sly grin, he tosses it at the platform next to Momo, where it explodes with a pop. Momo puffs up like a startled cat. He GROWLS, then lunges for the satchel. Momo then sits on Aang's shoulder and tosses pellets at his feet. Aang dances about wildly.)

Aang: Ow! Quit it!

(Sokka is oblivious of it all. He's sitting with his back to the trunk and staring at the platform before him, frowning. Katara walks up.)

Katara: Hey Sokka. Is Jet back?
Sokka: Yeah—he's back. But we're leaving.
Aang: What?
Katara: But I made him this hat.

(She pulls from behind her back a cap made out of stitched leaves with a flower on top. The workmanship is unimpressive.)

Sokka: Your boyfriend Jet's a thug.
Katara: What? No, he's not.
Sokka: He's messed up Katara.
Aang: He's not messed up, he's just got a different way of life—a really fun way of life.
Sokka: He beat and robbed a harmless old man!
Katara: I wanna hear Jet's side of the story.

(Cut to Jet.)

Jet: Sokka—you told them what happened but you didn't mention that the guy was Fire Nation?

(Jet and the trio are in a lantern-lit hut: at least one wall is made of wood. Jet is sitting on a hammock-bed, the others stand. Sokka stands grumpily as far away as he can get. Aang is wearing the hat Katara made; he looks like an acorn)

Katara: No, he conveniently left that part out.
Sokka: Fine! But even if he was Fire Nation, he was a harmless civilian
Jet: He was an assassin, Sokka.

(Jet pulls out a knife and thrusts it into a nearby block of wood. It is a sinister looking curved blade. There are four spikes evenly spaced along the grip, with enough space for fingers to go between them. There is a ring on the butt of the knife.)

Jet: See? There's a compartment for poison in the knife. (He pulls on the ring and removes a small glass tube filled with red liquid). He was sent to eliminate me—you helped save my life, Sokka.
Katara: I knew there was an explanation
Sokka: I didn't see any knife!
Jet: That's because he was concealing it.
Katara: See Sokka? I'm sure you just didn't notice the knife.
Sokka: There was no knife! I'm going back to the hut and packing my things. (He leaves.)
Jet: Tell me you guys aren't leaving yet. I really need your help.
Aang: What can we do?
Jet: The Fire Nation is planning on burning down our forest. If you both use water bending to fill the reservoir, we could fight the fires. But if you leave now, they'll destroy the whole valley.

(Aang and Katara look at each other. Fade to them entering their hut. Sokka is tying up a roll on the floor.)

Katara: We can't leave now with the Fire Nation about to burn down a forest!
Sokka: I'm sorry Katara. Jet's very smooth, but we can't trust him.
Katara: You know what I think? You're jealous that he's a better warrior and a better leader!
Sokka: Katara, I'm not jealous of Jet. It's just that my instinct—
Katara: Well my instincts tell me we need to stay here a little longer and help Jet. Come on Aang.
Aang: Sorry Sokka.

(They leave the hut. Fade to the night sky above the canopy. A full moon shines on Appa, who is on his back and snoring up a storm as he sleeps.

Inside the Trio's hut, Sokka sleeps propped up against his still-packed gear while the others sleep in their bedrolls.)

Jet: Let's go.

(Sokka stirs then snaps awake. He pulls the door flap aside enough to see some of Jet's followers descending on the rope lines. He leaves the hut, and takes a rope line down to a lower branch. On the ground below him, Jet's freedom fighters are quietly pushing the loaded wagon as Jet leads them out of the camp. Sokka stealthily follows.

In the dark valley, the walled town sits on the far side of a river that cuts through the forest. Upstream, and up toward the wall of the valley there is an old falls, and beyond that a man-made dam. A bare cliff off to the reservoir's left provides the view.

Jet and his boys emerge form the forest. He goes to the edge and looks down on the dam below. The reservoir behind it is low. He turns back to the wagon.)

Jet: Now listen—you are not to blow the dam until I give the signal. If the reservoir isn't full, the Fire Nation troops could survive.

(The Duke jumps off the wagon.)

Duke: But what about the people in the town—won't they get wiped out too?

(Jet places a hand on the Duke's shoulder.)

Jet: Look Duke, that's the price of ridding this area of the Fire Nation. (to Longshot): Now don't blow the dam until I give the signal—got it?

(Longshot nods. Sokka watches incredulously from the bushes. He frowns, and hears rustling just before Pipsqueak drags him out by his topknot. Smellerbee's knife is instantly at his throat.)

Smellerbee (sneering): Where do you think you're going, ponytail?

(FADE OUT.)



Act III

(FADE IN on Jet, standing near the edge of the cliff. As he watches, Pipsqueak and Smellerbee drag Sokka between them. Pipsqueak still has a handful of Sokka's topknot.)

Jet: Sokka. I'm glad you decided to join us.

(His captors send Sokka to his knees. He rubs his shoulder.)

Sokka: I heard your plan to destroy the Earth Kingdom town.
Jet: Our plan is to rid the valley of the Fire Nation.
Sokka: There are people living there Jet—mothers and fathers and children.
Jet: We can't win without making some sacrifices.

(Sokka points an accusing finger at Jet.)

Sokka: You lied to Aang and Katara about the forest fire!
Jet: Because they don't understand the demands of war. Not like you and I do.
Sokka: I do understand. I understand that there's nothing you won't do to get what you want.
Jet: I was hoping you'd have an open mind, but I can see you've made your choice.

(Pipsqueak and Smellerbee grab for Sokka. Before he can even react, Jet has his wrist pinned with the hooks of his shuang gou. Sokka's other hand is forced behind his back.

Jet: I can't let you warn Katara and Aang. (Jet releases Sokka's hand; it is immediately forced behind his back.) Take him for a walk--a long walk.
Sokka: You can't do this!
Jet: Cheer up, Sokka. We're gonna win a great victory against the Fire Nation today.

(Fade to the riverside upriver from the dam. The collected water behind it is much less than the larger cavity of the reservoir. The river leading to down to it is a thread compared to its ‘rainy season' gully. Jet, Katara and Aang are seen walking upriver along its west bank.)

Katara: Jet—I'm sorry about how Sokka's been acting.
Jet: No worries—he already apologized.
Aang: Really? (Aang and Katara stop and look at one another.) Sokka apologized?
Jet: Yeah—I was surprised too. I got the sense that maybe you talked to him or something.
Katara: Yeah, I did.
Jet: I guess something you said got through to him. Anyhow, he went out on a scouting mission with Pipsqueak and Smellerbee.
Katara: I'm glad he cooled off. He's so stubborn sometimes.

(They are now walking in the gully, beside the ‘river'. Aang pauses after noticing something strange, then is launched into the air by a blast from the geyser he was standing on.)

Jet: All right, we're here. Underground water's trying to escape through these vents. I need you guys to help it along.
Katara: ...I've never used bending on water I can't see. I don't know...

(Jet stands behind her and places his hands on her shoulders.)

Jet: Katara. You can do this.
Aang (back on the ground): What about me?
Jet: I know the Avatar can do this.

(Aang and Katara stand on either side of one of the many smoking holes in the gully. While Jet looks on, they perform bending gestures: they look like they are encouraging something up. After a few minutes, a bloby stream of water emerges from the hole. They pull it to their height, then send it toward the river where it continues to flow like a giant garden hose. The water quickly joins the river.)

Jet: Yes! Good job! This river empties into the reservoir--a few more geysers and it'll be full.
Aang: Look, there's another steam vent.

(Aang and Katara walk off in its direction.)

Jet: Okay. You two keep it up—I'll go check on things at the reservoir. (He turns and walks away.)
Katara: When we're done we'll meet you over there.
Jet: Actually...probably better if you meet me back at the hideout when you're done.

(Jet resumes walking away Aang and Katara bend the next geyser into another fountain.)

Aang: ...I bet that's enough—and I'm not just saying that to be lazy.

(Around them, a half dozen fountains flow into the river.)

Katara: Let's catch up with Jet at the reservoir.
Aang: I thought we agreed to meet Jet back at the hideout.
Katara: Well, we finished early--I'm sure he'll be happy to see us.

(Fade from Katara to a path in the forest. Pipsqueak and Smellerbee follow Sokka, who has his hands tied behind his back. Smellerbee gives his prisoner a shove; Sokka stumbles but remains on his feet.)

Smellerbee: Come on—move along!
Sokka: How can you stand by and do nothing while Jet wipes out a whole town?
Pipsqueak: Hey listen Sokka, Jet's a great leader. We follow what he says, and things always turn out okay.

(Sokka notices a couple of snare leaf-piles nearby. They identical to the one that enticed Momo, right down to the pile of nuts.)

Sokka: If that's how Jet leads, then he's got a lot to learn.

(Sokka sprints off in the direction of the snares. Smellerbee makes a grab for him, but misses.)

Smellerbee: Hey!

(They give chase. Sokka leaps over the leaf piles. Pipsqueak and Smellerbee don't, and end up snared and hanging many feet up in the air.)

Sokka: While you two are up there you might want to practice your knot-work. (He holds up his now-worthless bindings, then turns and walks away.)
Pipsqueak: Hey Smellerbee—you gonna eat your leechee nuts? (A nut strikes him in the head and lands in the pile he's holding.) Ooh. (He picks one up and licks his lips.)

(Katara and Aang are standing on the edge of the cliff. At the base of the dam, four of Jet's people are unloading barrels from the wagon and arranging them.)

Katara: ...What are they doing?
Aang: Hey, those are the red barrels he got from the Fire Nation.
Katara: Why would they need blasting jelly?

(Zoom on Aang, as he gets it.)

Aang: Because Jet's gonna blow up the dam.
Katara: What? No--that would destroy the town. Jet wouldn't do that.

(Aang snaps his glider wings open.)

Aang: I've gotta stop him. (He runs for the edge.)
Katara (less convinced): Jet wouldn't do that.

(Before Aang can reach the edge, Jet crosses his path from behind and snatches the glider. Aang is left wobbling precariously on the edge, and uses an airbending move to get himself back on stable footing.)

Jet: Yes I would.
Katara: Jet—why?
Jet: Katara, you would too if you just stopped to think. Think about what the Fire Nation did to your mother—we can't let them do that to anyone else, ever again.
Katara: This isn't the answer!
Jet: I want you to understand me Katara. I thought your brother would understand, but—
Katara: Where's Sokka?

(Tears fall from her eyes. Jet reaches out and touches her face.)

Jet: Katara.

(She bows her head, then with a SHOUT sends Jet flying with the water from her waterskin. She draws it back into the skin when she's done.)

Aang: I need to get to the dam.

(Aang's closed glider is on the ground. As he reaches for it, the crescent end of one of Jet's shuang gou pins it like an axe. Jet has the two weapons hook to hook; with a yank he pulls the sword and Aang's glider to him.)

Jet: You're not going anywhere without your glider.

(Jet swings the swords—still hook to hook—at Aang. Aang summersaults backwards to avoid the extra reach. Aang finishes his retreat in a nearby tree.)

Aang: I'm not gonna fight you, Jet.
Jet: You'll have to if you want your glider back.

(Aang retreats back into the forest, as Jet hooks the branch and pulls himself up. Katara follows on the ground. Jet attacks; Aang defends himself with balls of air, which Jet ducks. Jet attacks head on, but Aang blocks with his arms and sends his opponent flying into a tree trunk with an air kick. Jet combines his swords again and advances. Aang avoids the flail-like move and sends another air blast. Jet stoops down and lets the air flow over and past him, then lunges.

They continue the chase through the many levels of the forest. Jet catches up to Aang and sends them both freefalling, attacking as they go. They both end up on a branch. Jet continues his attack. Aang avoids it all. Jet charges again, but Aang hits him with a jetstream of air. Jet falls. He recovers, but looses the glider in the process. Before Aang can get to the ground Jet kicks him into a trunk. He lands with a thud next to his glider.

A small tributary flows past him. Aang is slow to get up. Before Jet can take more than a step however, he his hit by a large water strike. Katara is there; she uses water from the river to throw Jet against the trunk of the tree. Over and over she attacks; Jet is unable to cut the water and its force plasters him against the trunk. She bends the water to ice; the soggy renegade is left frozen from toe to neck.)

Katara: Why, Jet? I can't believe I trusted you. You lied to me—you're sick and I trusted you!

(A signal call is heard. Katara and Aang are startled, then look to the valley beyond—where it's coming from. Jet gives an answer call.)

Katara: What are you doing?
Jet: You're too late.
Katara (horrified): No!

(Aang snaps open his glider and runs for the nearby cliff/waterfall. His glider's wing is so shredded however, that he has no lift and slams back into the ground near the edge. Katara runs over to help him.)

Aang: Sokka's still out there—he's our only chance.
Katara: Come on, Sokka. I'm sorry I ever doubted you. Please.

(Cut to a tree. Longshot stands on a branch, his bow pulled. He has a fire arrow on the string He sights, then lets it fly.

It arcs down to the base of the dam.

Katara watches.)

Katara (whisper): No...

(The center of the dam explodes in a cloud of smoke and fire. Katara and Aang watch a massive wall of water go over the ‘dry' falls and down to the town.

Inside the town the streets are empty except for the occasional barrel and a market table with cabbages. The water rushes through the open gate, as a cresting wave dwarfs it. The wall and gate are swallowed as the wave strikes the town.

The flotsam carried away includes a smiling doll in a purple dress.)

Aang: Sokka didn't make it in time.
Katara: All those people...(She turns in rage back to Jet.) Jet—you monster!
Jet: This was a victory, Katara. Remember that. The Fire Nation is gone and this valley will be safe.
Sokka: It will be safe—without you.

(In shock, Jet looks up to see Sokka, Appa and Momo rise from below the level of the cliff. Sokka has Appa's reins.)

Katara: Sokka!
Sokka: I warned the villagers of your plan, just in time.
Jet: What!
Sokka: At first they didn't believe me. The Fire Nation soldiers assumed I was a spy. But one man vouched for me—the old man you attacked. He urged them to trust me, and we got everyone out in time.

(What Sokka describes is seen in monochrome pictures.

The townsfolk are seen on high ground above the river, on the bank opposite the town. A LITTLE GIRL runs down to the water's edge as the doll floats by. She retrieves it.)

Little Girl (Happily): Missus Pretty! (She hugs her doll.)
Jet: Sokka, you fool! We could've freed this valley!
Sokka: Who would be free—everyone would be dead.
Jet: You traitor!
Sokka: No, Jet. You became the traitor when you stopped protecting innocent people.
Jet: Katara. Please—help me.
Katara: Goodbye Jet.

(Sokka gives Appa's reigns a flick.)

Sokka: Yip yip.

(Jet is left behind on the ground, still frozen to the tree.

The sky they fly in is empty, save a few wispy clouds.)

Aang: We thought you were going to the dam. How come you went to the town instead?
Katara: Lemme guess—your instincts told you.
Sokka: Hey—sometimes they're right.
Aang: Um...Sokka? You know we're going the wrong way, right?

(Sokka is surprised, but quickly recovers.)

Sokka: ...And sometimes they're wrong. (With a grin, he pulls Appa's reigns. They fly off screen, then reappear going in the opposite direction. FADE OUT.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Opening shot of the sun setting behind some tall rock outcroppings. The sky is mostly cloudy and the clouds reflect the light of the dying sun. Pan down to show a patched up tent being jostled about from the inside. A rolled up tarp lies next to the tent. Inside the tent, Sokka can be heard grunting and fussing about as he tries to finish setting up the shelter.

Finally, the tent is raised and Sokka emerges from behind the tent's flap opening. As he does, Katara enters the frame, her back to the camera, carrying an arm load of wood.)

Katara: Um...aren't you forgetting the TARP?
Sokka: Right...got it.

(He picks up the rolled up tarp and throws it through the open flap and into the tent.)

Katara: (crossly) Sokka, you're supposed to put the tarp on TOP of the tent. You know, so we don't get RAINED on.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the two, Sokka gesturing widely as he replies to his sister.)

Sokka: Ordinarily you'd be right, but seeing how it's the dry season, you're not. Besides, that tarp makes a pretty warm blanket.
Katara: But what if it DOES rain?
Sokka: (spreading his arms wide in exasperation) But what if it doesn't? Then I would have put the tarp up for nothing.
Katara: (stomping the ground and gritting her teeth) Ur...arg! You're infuriating!
Sokka: Katara, why don't you worry about gathering the firewood because that kindling's looking PRETTY sorry.

(Cut to a brief close up shot of the firewood in her hands, then cut to her face.)

Katara: (looking sullen, then exploding in anger) Well if you don't like my firewood... (throws the wood at her brother) have it!

(Sokka raises his hands to shield himself, a shocked expression on his face. He stands in anger after the hail of sticks subsides.)

Sokka: Fine by me! If you're not going to do your job (he yanks the rope securing the tent to its to one of its supports. It falls down in a heap) ...urg!

(Cut to a wider shot as the tent collapses to reveal Aang approaching from behind it. His hands are full of some kind of food and Appa rests in the background. Katara and Sokka stand on opposite each sides of the screen, the fallen tent between them. They glower at each other.)

Aang: Okay, I got the grub if you guys got the... (Katara and Sokka turn away from each instantly, their arms across their chests, expressions of sullen anger on their faces) Hey, where's the campfire? And what happened to the tent?
Sokka: (still facing o.c.) Why don't you ask Miss Know It All? Queen of the Twigs!
Katara: (whipping around to yell at her brother's back) Oh yeah? (Pointing an accusatory finger) Well you're Mister Lazy Bum, King of the (she bends down quickly, picks up a twig, and throws it at her brother) ...Tents!

(The twigs hits Sokka in the back of the head. He whips around to face her.)

Aang: (laughs, and spreads his arms wide in a gesture of conciliation) Okay, listen guys. Harsh words won't solve problems, action will. Why don't you just switch jobs?
Katara: (concurrent with Sokka) Sounds good.
Sokka: (concurrent with Katara) Whatever.

(Both begin their new tasks, but each is still fuming at the other.)

Aang: (smiling in a self satisfied manner) You see that? Settling feuds and making peace. All in a days work for the Avatar.

(Aang's smile breaks as he looks off screen at the sound of Momo chittering. Cut to Momo desperately trying remove a melon that Appa is holding upright with one of the digits of his left forepaw. Momo struggles and even tries to fly away from it, but cannot move the melon. He gives up and begins to walk away, depressed. Appa groans, opens his mouth, and his tongue scoops up the melon. As he is about to close his mouth, Momo returns, grabs the melon and runs away. He runs into Aang who takes the melon, throws it into the air and slices a small piece of it off with a jet of air. The large piece lands in front of Appa who eats it, and the small piece lands in front of Momo, who turns to Aang and lets a chirp of protest.)

Aang: Come on Momo, that's fair. (Motioning to Appa) Appa's got FIVE stomachs.

(Fade to a daytime, panorama shot of a Grand Canyon like scene. The view is from the rim of the canyon looking across it. Momo flies across the screen, chittering. The camera pans right to follow him, revealing Aang, Katara and Sokka on the rim looking out over the breathtaking expanse.)

Aang: Here it is, guys, the Great Divide.

(Cut to a profile shot of Katara.)

Katara: Wow! I could just stare at it forever.

(Zoom backwards to show Sokka in the foreground.)

Sokka: (unimpressed, the music slurs to a halt in the background) Okay. I've seen enough.
Katara: How can you not be fascinated, Sokka? This is the largest canyon in the entire world.

(Cut to Sokka standing next to Appa and holding his reigns, obviously ready to leave.)

Sokka: Then I'm sure we'll be able to see it very clearly from the air while we fly away.

(Suddenly a man in an ornate white robe rushes past Sokka from o.c. He rudely pushes Sokka out of the way.)

Scout: (aggressively) Hey! If you're looking for the Canyon Guide, I was here first!

(Cut to profile shot of Katara who is joined moments later by the Scout and Aang.)

Katara: (clasping her hands in front of her in a gesture of hope) Ooooo...canyon guide. Sounds informative.
Scout: Believe me, he's more than a tour guide, he's an earthbender. And the only way in and out of the canyon is with his help. And he's takin' MY tribe across next!

(While he is speaking, cut to a front shot of the Scout. As he yammers, Sokka emerges from behind him and silently starts to mock him by opening and closing his hand in the "this guy talk too much" gesture. At the conclusion of the Scout's talk he looks at Sokka, who feigns innocence and walks off screen to Katara and Aang.)

Sokka: Calm down, we know you're next.
Scout: (pointing at Sokka o.c.) You wouldn't be calm if the Fire Nation destroyed YOUR home and forced YOU to flee. (He gestures to the vast canyon system in front of them) My whole tribe has to walk thousands of miles to the capital city of Ba Sing Se!
Katara: You're a refugee.
Scout: Humph. Tell me somethin' I don't know.

(Cut to a frontal shot of Katara and Aang looking at the Scout o.c., then cut to a view of the path leading up the canyon rim back through the surrounding forest. In the distance, a mass of people approaches.)

Katara: Is that your tribe?
Scout: It most certainly is NOT.

(Cut to a shot of the people approaching the group. They are dressed in rude animal skins and look generally unkempt.)

Scout: (continuing from o.c.) That's the Zhang tribe. A bunch of low-life thieves. They've been the enemies of my tribe for 100 years. (Cut back to the Scout, who whistles rudely at the Zhang) Hey Zhangs! I'm savin' a spot for my tribe so don't even THINK of stealing it!

(A huge Zhang woman enters the frame and walks up to the Scout menacingly. The Scout leans back, somewhat intimidated.)

Zhang Leader: Where are the rest of the Gan Jin? Still tidying up their campsite?
Scout: (leaning forward to push the Zhang Leader back) Yes! But they sent me ahead of them to hold a spot.
Zhang Leader: I didn't know the canyon Guide took reservations.
Scout: Heh! Of course you didn't. That's the ignorance I'd expect from a messy Zhang! So unorganized and ill prepared for a journey.

(The entire Zhang tribe begins to grumble loudly at this. An angry mob is about to form. Cut to Aang and Katara looking disconcerted, Momo behind them in the background sitting on a piles of rocks on the lip of the canyon. Suddenly, the sound of moving earth is heard and the camera cuts to Momo. The rocks underneath him quiver and begin to split apart. Momo jumps out of the screen as the rocks are picked up and thrown out of the screen by an old man, the Canyon Guide, in a straw hat and green clothing.)

Canyon Guide: (grunting) Sorry about the wait, youngsters. (Gesturing to the majestic canyon below them) Who's ready to cross this here canyon?

(Cut to Katara, Sokka and Aang.)

Katara: Um... (pointing to her right, o.c.) one of them I think.

(Camera pans left to reveal the Zhang and the Scout, the latter of which runs forward.)

Scout: I was here first! My party's on their way!
Canyon Guide: I can't guide people who aren't here.

(Cut to a wider shot showing the Zhang filing past the three kids and the fuming Gan Jin Scout.)

Zhang Leader: (with mock sadness) Guess you guys'll have to make the trip tomorrow.

(The shot shifts to a close up the scout, whose eyes twitch in anger. The camera zooms backward and pans left to reveal another tribe entering the canyon entrance area. The Scout points to them in triumph.)

Scout: Wait! Here they come!

(Cut to a profile shot of several Gan Jin walking in stately order towards them. They are all dressed elegantly and wear formal expressions on their faces. The music changes to a dainty, spring ball type ballad that helps to signify the demeanor of the Gan Jin. Cut to the Zhang Leader who whips around to look at the newcomers, then cut to an overhead wide of the two tribes now facing each other with Appa and the kids between them.)

Zhang Leader: (pointing a finger at the Canyon Guide's chest) You're not seriously going to cave into these spoiled Gan Jins! I mean, we're refugees too! And we've got sick people that need shelter.
Canyon Guide: (holding out the palms of his hands in a gesture of placation) I...uh...well...

(Cut to a wide shot of the Gan Jin. A white haired man, the Gan Jin Leader, stands next to the Scout.)

Scout: We've got old people who are weary from traveling.
Zhang Leader: Sick people get priority over old people.
Gan Jin Leader: Maybe you Zhang's wouldn't have so many sick people if you weren't such slobs.
Zhang Leader: If you Gan Jins weren't so clean, (cut to the kids as the war of words between the two leaders continues o.c.) maybe you wouldn't live to be so old.
Gan Jin Leader: (from o.c.) I could smell your stink a mile away.
Katara: (As Gan Jin Leader speaks) Well Aang, ready to put your peace making skills to the test?
Aang: (looking to the ground in doubt) I... don't know. A fight over chores is one thing. These people have been feuding for 100 years.
Katara: (walking forward and raising her voice to be heard by all) Everyone, listen up! (Pointing backward at Aang, a fierce look on her face) This is the Avatar! And if you give him a chance, I'm sure he can come up with a compromise that will make everyone happy.

(The two tribes look to Aang for a moment in silence. Cut to Aang, who after a moment offers an obvious solution.)

Aang: Uh...you could share the earthbender and travel together?
Gan Jin Leader: Absolutely not! We'd rather be taken by the Fire Nation (he points accusingly o.c. at the Zhang) than travel with those stinking thieves.

(Camera zooms left to the Zhang Leader, who, in turn, points an accusing finger at the Gan Jin Leader.)

Zhang Leader: We wouldn't travel with you pompous fools anyway!
Gan Jin Leader: (pompously) I am not pompous!

(General pandemonium breaks out as the tribes begin to yell at each other. This continues for a moment or two before Aang intervenes. The camera shows a close up of Aang's face as he yells.)

Aang: (Angry) Alright! Here's the deal! (Cut to a slowly panning wide shot) We're all going down together and Appa here will fly your sick and elderly across. Does that seem fair?

(The two leaders nod their grudging approval. Cut to Aang in the foreground with a small smile on his face, Katara and Sokka in the background looking happy as well. Fade to a shot of the open sky which pans down to show Appa and his saddle now full of elderly and sick Gan Jin and Zhang. The two groups eye each other suspiciously in the saddle. They sit as far away as possible from each other. Cut to a wide shot of Aang petting Appa.)

Aang: Sorry Appa. You'll have to do this on your own. (Appa grunts.)
Sokka: This feuding tribe stuff is serious business. Are you sure it's a good idea getting involved in this?
Aang: To tell the truth, I'm not sure. (Smiling widely) But when have I ever been?
Katara: (Putting a hand on Aang's shoulder) He's the Avatar, Sokka. Making peace between people is his job.
Sokka: (slumping in despair) His job's gonna make us cross this whole thing on foot, isn't it?

(Cut to an overhead wide shot of the two tribes and the others.)

Canyon Guide: Okay, now comes the bad news. (Cut to a frontal shot of the Guide) No food allowed in the canyon. It attracts (he makes motions with his hands to illustrate the skittery monsters that might lurk in the canyon) dangerous predators.

(The tribes dissatisfied cacophony rises again at the interdiction against food.)

Gan Jin Leader: No food! This is ridiculous.
Canyon Guide: Aww, you babies can go a day without food. Would you rather be hungry...or dead?

(At this, the Guide raises a pillar of stone underneath him. He now towers ten feet or more over the rest. He continues, cupping his hands to his mouth to amplify his voice.)

Canyon Guide: Now, we're headin' down in 10 minutes. All food better be in your gut, or in the garbage!

(Cut to a shot of the Zhang who whip various bits of food out of their tunics and begin to eat sloppily. Cut to the Gan Jin, who eat little bits of food with chopsticks. The dainty music plays again in the background. When the Gan Jin man in the foreground is done, he dabs his lips with a white napkin. Cut to Aang addressing the people in Appa's saddle.)

Aang: Appas's gonna take good care of you until we get there. (He drops down to the ground and addresses Appa) See ya on the other side, buddy. Yip, yip!

(Appa grunts and flies off. Cut to a wide shot of Appa making a bee-line with his passengers for the other side of the canyon. Fade to a far and wide shot of the canyon wall underneath the canyon path entrance. The Canyon Guide's outpost is still visible at the top of the screen on the canyon rim. Underneath, the tribes are walking down a steep, switch-back path.

The shot pans down, revealing more of the path in front of them. Cut to a close up shot of Aang and the Canyon Guide leading the procession. The Guide puts a hand in front of Aang to stop him as the camera pans down again to reveal a break in the path in front of them. The drop is hundreds of feet down. The Guide whirls around and makes a motion with his outstretched arm and fist. With a grunt of effort, the camera switches to wide that shows blocks of stone pushes outward from the canyon wall face to repair the path in front of them.)

Aang: Nice bending!

(They begin to move forward again.)

Canyon Guide: The job's much more than bending, kid. Folks want information.

(They stop and the Canyon Guide turns to address the crowd. He continues in a slightly bored voice while the camera shows various shots of the canyon system.)

Canyon Guide: Many of you are probably wondering how canyons are formed. Experts tell us this canyon was most likely carved into the ground by Earth Spirits who were angry at local farmers for not offering them a proper sacrifice.

(Cut to Katara and Sokka who look at each other, then gasp and look up at the sound of rumbling from o.c. Cut to a rock slide beginning above them. The rocks come down on the group, but are bent away by the Canyon Guide into the canyon below.)

Canyon Guide: (laughing) Guess the spirits are still angry! Hope you all brought sacrifices.

(Cut to a wide shot of the canyon floor and the canyon wall on the right side of the screen. The view pans slowly rightward, then cut to a closer, overhead shot of the group now at the bottom of the switchback trail. They have just entered the canyon floor. The Guide stands in front of the two tribes and the kids.)

Canyon Guide: Okay...everyone stand clear of the wall.

(The Canyon Guide earthbends a nearby rock outcropping and throws it at the bridge he created earlier. The bridge is destroyed.)

Aang: Why'd you do that?

(The debris from the bridge lands behind them, raising a cloud of dust that obscures everything in the background.)

Canyon Guide: These people are fleeing the Fire Nation, aren't they? I gotta make sure we can't be followed. We'll be safe now.

(A massive, insect shaped silhouette appears in the dust behind the Guide. A pincer emerges from the dust and picks up the Guide, who yelps in surprise. Cut to Aang, who airbends the dust away with a yell. The monster is revealed. It is a huge, black insect like creature with four legs, red eyes, and a long thin mouth with teeth. The Canyon Guide is in the creature's mouth, screaming. Cut to Sokka.)

Sokka: We gotta help him!

(He throws his boomerang. It flashes through the air and strikes the beast on the head. It drops the Guide and rushes Sokka. The guide lands with a thump in the underbrush. Cut to the advancing monster. It slavers with its tongue hanging out. Cut to Sokka, running for his life, the creature close behind.)

Sokka: Okay...now you gotta help me!

(Sokka runs over a rock outcropping. The creature follows over the outcropping as Sokka doubles back. Katara arrives, opens her water bottle and whips it with the water. It smacks the creature, but has little effect. It tries to bite her, but she lunges o.c. as Aang drops into the frame and shoots a blast of at the monster. It gets blown backward, but charges again. With enough lead time before the creature reaches him, Aang is able to create a tornado with his staff. He catches the creature in the tornado and throws far up the cliff. Able to walk on the walls, the creature quickly hides in one of the canyon walls many crevices. Cut back to Aang who turns to the others, a look of concern on his face.)

Aang: What was that?

(Cut to Katara kneeling over the distressed Guide who is laid out flat on the ground.)

Canyon Guide: Canyon crawler. (In pain) Oh, ugh! And there's sure to be more.
Katara: Your arms...they're broken.
Canyon Guide: Without my arms, I got no bending. In other words...

(Cut to a frontal shot of Aang, the two tribes on either side of him. The shot zooms closer to Aang, without changing the perceived distance of the tribes behind him. This creates a distorting effect that accentuates the horror behind Aang's next pronouncement.)

Aang: ...we're trapped in this canyon.

(Cut to a wide shot of the group at the base of the canyon, then fade to black for commercial.)



Act II

(Return from break to a shot of the canyon rim. The shot pans back down to group at the base. Cut to a shot of Katara finishing a set of bandages on the Guide's arms. Aang, Sokka and the Gan Jin are visible in the background.)

Sokka: (camera zooms in on him) I thought the whole point of ditching our food was so we wouldn't have to deal with things like... canyon crawlers...
Gan Jin Leader: It's the Zhangs! They took food down here, even after the guide told them not to!
Zhang Leader: (approaching the Gan Jin Leader with an accusatory finger pointed at him) What! If there's anyone who can't go without food for a day, it's you pampered Gan Jins!
Gan Jin Leader: I hope you're happy. (Cut to Aang, Katara and the Guide behind him. He looks displeased at the resumption of the bickering) We're stuck in the canyon with no way out.
Zhang Leader: Why don't you thank yourself, food hider!
Aang: Look. Sticking together is the only way to...
Zhang Leader: (rudely interrupting the Avatar and again pointing at the Gan Jin Leader) I'm not walkin' another step with the likes of them.
Gan Jin Leader: (folding his arms across his chest) Now, there's something we can agree on.
Aang: (turning to look back o.c. at Katara and the Guide) Any ideas?

(Cut to a close shot of the Guide. The camera slowly zooms in on the Guide as he speaks, his eyes wide and getting wider as hysteria grips his mind.)

Canyon Guide: No bending. We need to get out of this canyon. I won't die down here! I won't become part of the food chain!

(Cut to Aang, the Gan Jin Leader behind him, who speaks o.c. to his Zhang counterpart.)

Gan Jin Leader: See? We're going to become part of the food chain because of YOU!
Zhang Leader: Sure. Unjustly blame the Zhangs like you ALWAYS do!
Gan Jin Leader: Gladly!

(A blast of wind tears across the screen, surprising everyone.)

Aang: ENOUGH! (Cut to Aang, angry) I thought I could help you guys get along, but I guess that's not going to happen.

(Cut to a wide shot where Aang airbends himself to the top of a small bluff. The bluff is the beginning of what amounts to a stone baulk between two canyons on either side.)

Aang: We should split up. Gan Jins on this side...and Zhangs on that side. We'll travel in two separate lines.

(Cut to a shot from the canyon bottom where the two leaders look up at Aang, then at each other, then nod. They and their following begin to take their separate paths, Zhang on the left, Gan Jin on the right. Aang hops down as Sokka and Katara approach him.)

Aang: Sokka, you go with the Zhangs. And Katara, you go with the Gan Jins. See if you can figure out why they hate each other so much.

(Sokka and Katara split up to follow their assigned tribes. Cut to a wide shot of the two tribes following their separate paths. The screen pans up to the sky. It fades from midday to dusk, then pans back down to Aang standing atop another bluff, surveying the two groups setting up their camps below. Cut to Sokka coming up behind the Zhang leader. He puts his hand to his chin as he observes.)

Sokka: So, you guys aren't going to put up your tarps?
Zhang Leader: What for? It's the dry season.
Sokka: (releasing suppressed exasperation) Exactly!
Zhang Leader: (turning to Sokka, smiling) Besides, we like to use the tarp as a blanket.
Sokka: Finally, someone gets it.

(Cut to a long shot of the Gan Jin camp. Their tents are pristine white and erected perfectly. The dainty music plays as we see two Gan Jin set up a tarp over one of their tents. The camera zooms back to reveal Katara speaking with the Gan Jin leader.)

Katara: You really think it'll rain?
Gan Jin Leader: No, but you can never be too careful, right?

(Katara smiles at the Gan Jin Leader, pleased at his response. Fade to a night scene. Crickets chirp as a shot of the moon pans down to the Gan Jin camp. The Gan Jin sit in a circle around the campfire. The camera pans across the group to Katara and the Gan Jin leader. After a moment, the Gan Jin leader looks around and then produces some bread from underneath his robe. Katara gasps. Soon all the Gan Jin are eating food with their chopsticks, it is clear they all violated the ban.)

Gan Jin Leader: (offering Katara some bread) Would you care for some bread, Katara?
Katara: So it was you guys who had food!
Gan Jin Leader: Oh come now. You really think that tribe of thieves isn't smuggling food? Why should MY people go hungry when the sneaky Zhangs are stuffing their faces?
Katara: (hesitating, then taking the bread) Well, I guess it's okay if everyone's doing it. (She eats a few bites, then turns back to the Gan Jin Leader) So, why does your tribe hate the Zhang so much?
Gan Jin Leader: You seem like a smart girl, Katara. I bet you would enjoy hearing some history.

(As the Leader speaks, the camera pans away to stars of the night sky. As he concludes, the camera pans down to the horizon as dawn approaches. Noble music plays in the background. The scene is of a path coming out of the mountains, the sun rising in the east behind them. The path runs through a Chinese paifang or perhaps a Japanese torii gate in the foreground. Cut to a vision of a well built, well dressed, noble looking Gan Jin warrior, his hair flowing in the wind. The style of animation is now very idealized. The Gan Jin Leader narrates the succeeding tale from o.c.)

Gan Jin Leader: The patriarch of our tribe, Jin Wei, was an earthbender warrior who was assigned an important duty; transporting our sacred orb from the Great Eastern Gate to the Great Western Gate.

(During this explanation, cut to a shot of someone holding a pink, translucent, crystal ball out to someone else, the sun and the gate visible in the background. Another pair of hands takes the offered orb. The camera rises to show the sun perfectly framed by the circular, doughnut like ornament on top of the gate. Cut to a profile shot of Jin Wei and the gate. He kneels, holding the orb out before him. It catches the rays of the sun through the gate and glows brightly.)

Gan Jin Leader: Taking the orb from the east to the west represents the sunï¿½s rising and setting. It was our tribe's ancient redemption ritual...

(Jin We runs through several different landscapes before cutting to a dusk scene on a forest path. Another paifang or torii gate arches over the path here, presumably the Great Western Gate. In the distance, Jin Wei approaches at a run, his cape flowing behind him.)

Gan Jin Leader: ...but as he approached the gate, Jin Wei was attacked by one of the Zhang!

(Jin Wei gets knocked off the path by a grubby looking newcomer, the orb flying into the air. The orb is caught by the ruffian, which glows with power as its new possessor grins sardonically with greed at his plunder.)

Gan Jin Leader: A vermin, named Wei Jin, who looked at the orb with envy. That coward, Wei Jin, knocked Jin Wei to the ground and stole our sacred orb. (Fade back to Gan Jin leader's face, his eyes closed in remembrance) Our people have never forgotten. You can never trust a Zhang.

(Cut to Katara, who looks o.c. towards the Zhang camp, an expression of hardness and suspicion spreading over her face.

The screen pans left to reveal the Zhang camp in the distance, then cut to Sokka sitting next to the Zhang leader. She produces a leg of meat from a bag and offers it to Sokka.)

Zhang Leader: Care for some meat?
Sokka: Would I!?

(Sokka grabs the leg and begins to eat hungrily.)

Zhang Leader: I know what you must be thinking. We're horrible for endangering everybody by bringing food down here.
Sokka: (munching, barely paying attention) Mm hmm!
Zhang Leader: The Gan Jin think so badly of us they probably assumed we brought food in and decided to bring food in themselves. That's why we brought food in.
Sokka: (still munching) Mmmm!
Zhang Leader: Our conflict with the Gan Jin goes back over a hundred years...

(The camera again pans to the stars as the Zhang Leader narrates her story from o.c. The scene reforms around a very cartoonish portrayal of another gate. Tribal music plays in the background. The animation here is very rustic.)

Zhang Leader: Our forefather, Wei Jin, was leaving the western gate of our village...

(A figure, Wei Jin, runs east through the gate, cut to a close up of Wei Jin, who looks almost as bad as he did in the Gan Jin version.)

Zhang Leader: ...when he saw a figure in the distance. It was a man of the Gan Jin tribe, Jin Wei, collapsed on the ground.

(Wei Jin stops in mid stride in surprise. Cut to a shot of a man crawling in the distance. It is Jin Wei, crawling on the ground, obviously in distress. The camera pans back slightly to reveal Wei Jin standing above him.)

Zhang Leader: Noble Wei Jin stopped to help him. (Wei Jin bends to help, but Jin Wei points ahead. The camera zooms out to show the orb.) Jin Wei was transporting a sacred orb, a very powerful relic used in his tribe's redemption ritual. Wei Jin tried to tend to the man's wounds, but Jin Wei insisted the orb was more important, (Jin Wei makes dramatic gestures of self sacrifice at this pronouncement) and asked him to take it back to his tribe. (Wei Jin grabs the orb and begins to run) Kind Wei Jin promised to send help for the man as soon as he could, but as Wei Jin crossed the border to return the orb into Gan Jin territory he was arrested!

(As Wei Jin runs through another gate, his path is blocked by three thuggish Gan Jin warriors with drawn swords. He is smacked down and he drops the orb. Cut to the inside of a jail cell, the door of which opens and Wei Jin is thrown inside.)

Zhang Leader: Instead of thanking him for his kind and selfless deed, they sentenced him to twenty long years in prison. (Cut back to Zhang Leader who continues bitterly) We Zhang's will never forget that injustice.

(Cut to wider shot of her and Sokka.)

Sokka: That's just terrible. (Pointing to her leg of meat) You gonna finish that?

(She takes a bite in response. Sokka looks depressed and slumps a bit.

Cut to Aang and Momo looking down at the camps below with longing, backs to the camera.)

Aang: Sure would be nice to be around one of those campfires, telling stories and laughing. (Momo chitters as the screen cuts to a frontal shot of Aang and his lemur.) It's okay, Momo, we'll be out of here soon enough and then we can eat our weight in leechy nuts!

(Momo hears a flying bug, catches it and offers it to Aang.)

Aang: Nah, I'll wait for the leechy nuts.

(Momo begins chomping.)

Canyon Guide: (from o.c. as Aang turns to the voice) It's lonely, isn't it? (Cut to the Guide walking up to him.) Being impartial.
Aang: I wish I could help these people get along, but it just seems impossible. Anyhow, I guess our biggest problem is getting out of here.
Canyon Guide: (lying down next to Aang) I'm not so sure the two problems are unrelated.

(The Guide nods off to sleep, then cut to Aang who looks away sadly.

Fade to a morning shot of the sky. The camera pans down to reveal the Guide and Aang atop the baulk, the two tribes continuing their trek on either side.)

Canyon Guide: All clear! (Pointing to somewhere below) We're almost to the other side.

(A few shots of the tribes walking reveal that the baulk, or rock separator of the canyons that the tribes have been using for travel, is coming to an end. The tribes are now in site of each other, Aang and the Canyon Guide between them. Katara and Sokka bring up the rear of each.)

Aang: Katara, Sokka, will these people cooperate long enough to get out of the canyon?
Katara: (somewhat harshly) I don't think so, Aang, the Zhang's really wronged the Gan Jins. They ambushed Jin We and stole the sacred orb.
Aang: What are you talking about?
Sokka: Yeh, Katara, what are you talking about? We Jin didn't steal the orb, he was returning it to their village gate and was wrongfully punished by the Gan Jin.
Katara: (arms across her chest) Not punished enough if you ask me!

(Sokka makes angry, frustrated noises as Aang replies.)

Aang: Okay! Okay! I get it! Now I need your help. Let's get everyone together at the base of the canyon wall.

(Aang then opens his glider and flies off. Cut to an overhead shot of the canyon floor and wall. The two tribes are once again facing each other. Aang lands between them. They are arguing once again. He fold his glider up and addresses the crowd.)

Aang: Please everyone! As soon as we get out of here we can eat, and then go our separate ways, but I need you all to put your heads together and figure out a way up this cliff.
Gan Jin Leader: Maybe the Zhang can climb the walls with their long, disgusting fingernails.
Zhang Leader: Oh, sorry! I forgot that to the Gan Jin, unclipped fingernails is a crime punishable by twenty years in jail!
Gan Jin Leader: Why you dirty thief!
Zhang Leader: You pompous fool!

(The tribes begin taunting and arguing with each other again, this time joined by Katara and Sokka who have become partisans of their respective tribes.)

Aang: Guys! FOCUS! How many times do I have to say it? Harsh words won't solve problems, ACTION will!
Zhang Leader: Perhaps the Avatar is right.
Gan Jin Leader: Yes, perhaps he is.

(Cut to Aang, whose eyes are shiny with hope. He smiles widely. Cut back to a zooming close up of the Zhang Leader.)

Zhang Leader: Harsh words will never solve our problems...
Gan Jin Leader: (cut to zooming close up of him) ...action will!

(Both leaders draw their swords and approach each other. They cross swords in front of Aang, who draws back with a cry of surprise and fear. Fade to commercial break.)



Act III

(The show returns to an overhead shot of the two leaders facing off against one another, the tribes watching the spectacle.)

Gan Jin Leader: To the death! And let this be the end of this rivalry!
Aang: (nervously) You know, I take it back! Harsh words aren't so bad!

(The leaders ignore him and begin the fight in earnest. After several feints and thrusts, they push each other apart. The Gan Jin's lower beard falls off, and one of the Zhang's hair braids falls off. They rush at each other again, but as they meet Aang brings his stuff down and blows the two sides backwards.

Cut to Aang breathing heavily, a savage look on his face. He looks over to the Gan Jin on his left and his jaw drops. Cut to the Gan Jin, where a wrapped blanket of food has opened and spilled its contents all over. One of the Gan Jin kicks the blanket cover back over some of the food.)

Aang: Is that... food? (In disbelief) Everyone smuggled food down here!? (Turning back to the Zhang) UNBELIEVABLE! You guys put our lives in danger because you couldn't go without a snack for a day!? You are all...AWFUL!

(Aang eyes suddenly become huge as he spies something among the Zhang. Cut to a shot of the Zhang with various bits of food lying about. On a blanket is a pie, which the camera zooms in on. It is instantly highlighted with a shaft of light as if from heaven. Cut to Aang grabbing his gurgling stomach, then pan to his face, his eyes still huge.)

Aang: So hungry... (he points at the pie, desperately trying to retain self control) is that...egg custard in that tart?

(The camera pans over Aang's left shoulder and zooms slowly to the cliff wall. Many canyon crawlers emerge simultaneously, attracted by the scent of food. The monsters are soon upon them and the tribes flee. Katara and Sokka get behind the nearest rock.)

Katara: Oh no! That's a lot of canyon crawlers!
Sokka: (drawing out his boomerang) We barely survived one!

(The Canyon Guide appears in the background, walking backwards in terror.)

Canyon Guide: They're coming back for me! They've had a taste, and they're coming back for me!

(Sokka moves to leave the shelter of the rock and attack, an expression of determination on his face, but he is grabbed by Katara.)

Katara: Sokka, wait! I don't care about this stupid feud! I just want us to get out of here alive.
Sokka: (looking chagrined) Me too. I only took their side because they fed me.

(They both run from behind the rock, then cut to canyon crawlers charging the camera. Aang lifts on his glider, lands, and airbends a gale at a wall of the insects. It has no effect. They charge and butt heads as Aang jumps into the air just as they reach him. He blasts them away from each other as he falls back down. This stuns them momentarily, but they get back up.

General melee now begins as the creatures attack the tribes. The Zhang leader forces one back with her curved sword, while Katara water whips another that is threatening two Gan Jins. Another monster breaks her whip, however, and she loses the water. Sokka is chased by a crawler, but he hits it with his boomerang. Aang airbends four more crawlers out of his way. A quick pan shot, though, reveals that the crawlers have cornered small bands of tribes people all over the place. Aang looks over to see the crawlers chewing food, their heads inside the food bags.)

Aang: (shouting) Everybody! Watch me! (He raises a food bag to show everybody) Do what I do!

(He leaps toward the nearest bunch of crawlers and throws a piece of food at them. One of the crawlers catches the food in its mouth and eats it. The crawler runs to him, but he puts the bag over its snout. He then catapults himself onto its bag and uses the bag straps as reigns. The two tribes now work together, repeating the process to turn the monsters into riding mounts. Soon all the tribes people have a canyon crawler mount.)

Aang : (shouting) Now, follow me! We're riding out of this hole!

(Grinning evilly, Aang swings a rod with a bag of food on the end in front of his mount, which turns around and starts climbing the climb. He is soon joined by the rest. Cut to a wide shot of the whole troop moving up the cliff. Momo flies up on his own. Soon Aang and his ride mount the cliff. He dismounts.)

Aang: Everyone! Get off!

(Katara, Sokka, and the two leaders dismount.)

Zhang Leader: (to Gan Jin Leader) We made it!

(The Canyon Guide falls off his mount. Cut to Aang who throws a bag of food over the cliff, dropping food as it falls. The crawlers run after it. Cut back to the tribes as the crawlers leave, then a close up of the two leaders.)

Zhang Leader: I never thought a Gan Jin could get his hands dirty like that.
Gan Jin Leader: And I never knew you Zhang's were so reliable in a pinch.
Zhang Leader: Perhaps we're not so different after all.

(Cut to Aang, Sokka and Katara behind him. He sighs happily. Cut back to Gan Jin Leader.)

Gan Jin Leader: Too bad we can't rewrite history. (He draws his sword and points it at the Zhang leader.) You thieves stole our sacred orb from Jin Wei!
Zhang Leader: (drawing her sword) You tyrants unjustly imprisoned We Jin for twenty long years!

(Cut to Aang who cries out and grabs the side of his face in frustration. Then an idea lights up his face.)

Aang: Wait a second! Jin Wei? Wei Jin? I know those guys!
Gan Jin Leader: Yes, yes, we're all aware of the story.
Aang: No! (the leaders lower their weapons and turn to Aang) I mean I really knew them. I may not look it, but I'm 112 years old. I was there a hundred years ago on the day you're talking about...

(The scene fades to a vision of Aang's version of events. It too is stylized, though different than either partisan version. Aang narrates from o.c. during his recounting. The scene begins with the idealized versions of Jin Wei and Wei Jin facing each other with swords drawn.)

Aang: There seems to be a lot of confusion about what happened. First of all, Jin Wei and Wei Jin weren't enemies, they were brothers (the two stop fighting and look at each other in shock), twins in fact (they change instantly with a popping sound to look alike except for their clothes) and they were eight (the scene splits to reveal very young, chibi versions of the two characters, music box like music begins to play in the background) and most importantly, they were just playing a game! (The two kids smile and open their mouths in laughter). The sacred orb from the legend (a balls drops between the two kids) ...that was the ball. And the eastern and western gates were the goal posts (screen widens to show a playing field with two gate-like goal posts). Jin Wei had the ball and was running toward the goal when he fell and fumbled it. Win Jei didn't steal the ball, he picked it up and started running it back toward the other goal. But he stepped out of bounds (a referee in the shape of a panda appears, waving a red flag and blowing a whistle), so the official put him in the penalty box, not for twenty long years, but for two short minutes.

(Jin Wei appears, laughing and pointing at the unhappy Wei Jin. Fade back to the present.)

Aang: There was no stealing and no putting anyone in prison. Just a game.
Zhang Leader: You're saying the sacred orb was actually a sacred ball?
Aang: Nope, just a regular ball.
Scout: What about our tribe's redemption ritual?
Aang: That's what the game was called, Redemption. As soon as someone got the ball from one goal to the other everyone would yell, "redemption!" (The leaders look at each other) Don't get me wrong, Wei Jin was kind of a slob and Jin Wei was a little stuffy, that much is true, but they respected each others differences enough to share the same playing field.
Zhang Leader: (to Gan Jin Leader) I suppose it's time we forget the past...
Gan Jin Leader: (bowing to Zhang Leader) ...and look to the future.

(The Zhang Leader bows in turn as Aang, smiling, looks on.

Fade to a daylight scene of the area. Camera pans down to show the two tribes still at the canyon rim. Appa and the elderly and sick are there. Cut to a close up on Aang hugging Appa. Sokka, Katara and the Guide are in the background.)

Aang: Good to see ya, boy! Did you miss me?

(Appa licks Aang as the Gan Jin leaders approaches.)

Gan Jin Leader: I cannot thank you enough, Avatar.
Aang: (turning to him, drenched in Appa's saliva) Well, you know, I try.

(The Gan Jin Leader shrinks in horror from the horror of Aang's slimed body. Cut back to the Gan Jin Leader approaching his Zhang counterpart.)

Zhang Leader: (to the crowd) Let us travel to the Earth Kingdom capital as one tribe!

(The crowd cheers and follows the leaders down the path. Cut to the Canyon Guide running between the kids to follow the path.)

Canyon Guide: I'm goin' too! I'm sick of this place!
Sokka: That's some luck you knew Jin Wei and Wei Jin.
Aang: (smiling) You could call it luck. (Grinning evilly) Or, you could call it... lying!

(Cut to Katara holding Momo in shock and Sokka angry at this pronouncement.)

Sokka: What!?
Aang: (sheepishly) I made the whole thing up.
Katara: (in disbelief) You did not! (Then in devilish admiration) That is so wrong.
Aang: (looking around) Now where's that custard tart? (Cut to wide shot of them moving to get on Appa) I'm starving!

(Shot pans up to the late afternoon sky, then fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(The scene begins in a dream sequence. The animation is slightly fuzzy and the sky is a peculiar cream color. We see Aang shaking Appa's reigns, smiling. Cut to a wide shot of Aang on Appa. The screen pans right to show Sokka flying gracefully on Aang's glider. Close up of Sokka, smiling at Aang, whom we see smiling at Sokka in return. Aang looks over to his right to see Katara flying on an enormous version of Momo. She waves at him. Cut to shot of all three flying towards the camera.)

Katara: We need you, Aang.
Aang: I need you too.

(Aang turns from Katara to look straight ahead in alarm. A huge, black storm cloud has gathered ahead. Cut back to Aang.)

Aang: Be careful guys! Guys?

(He looks from side to side in surprise. The shot widens to reveal that Sokka and Katara have disappeared. Cut to a shot from Aang's p.o.v, he is approaching the storm quickly. Suddenly, a cross-legged Monk Gyatso drops from the top of the frame to rest just above Appa's head.)

Aang: Gyatso?
Gyatso: Why did you disappear?
Aang: I didn't mean to.

(Cut to side view as Aang leans forward to touch his old master, but before he can Gyatso turns grey as ash and begins to blow away starting from the head down. Soon he is gone. After Gyatso disintegrates, the camera cuts to a wide, side shot of Aang and Appa entering the storm clouds.)

Gyatso (from o.c.): We need you, Aang.

(Inside the cloud, lightning illuminates the sky. It is pouring rain and Aang screams as he holds on to Appa for his life. Appa and Aang plunge into the sea in a replay of his accident a century ago. Aang relinquishes his hold on Appa and begins to drift away in the water.)

Many Voices: We need you, Aang. We need you.

(At the end of the last sentence a vision of the Fire Lord, wreathed in flame, is visible for an instant in the afterglow of a lightning strike. At this horrifying vision Aang wakes instantly from his dream with a start. It is night at their most recent camp. He disturbs Momo, who wakes up Katara and Sokka while trying to get away, Sokka ready with his knife and boomerang.)

Sokka (groggily): Huh? Uh... what's going on? Did we get captured again?
Aang: It's nothing, I just had a bad dream. Go back to sleep.
Sokka: Don't have to tell me twice.

(Sokka rolls over back to sleep. Cut to Aang in a fetal position, looking pained.)

Katara: Are you all right, Aang?
Aang: I'm okay.
Katara: You seem to be having a lot of nightmares lately, you wanna tell me about it?
Aang: I think I just need some rest.
Sokka (sits up, excited): You guys want to hear about my dream? (Silence, as Katara looks annoyed.) That's ok, I didn't wanna talk about it anyway.

(Sokka and Katara lie back down to sleep. Fade to a day scene of a beach. Cut to Appa yawning and Katara packing for them to get under way. Aang sits atop Appa, and when the bison is done yawning Aang points to the heavens.)

Aang: Look at those clear skies, buddy! Should be some smooth flying.
Katara (examining empty food bag): Well, we better smoothly fly ourselves to a market, cause we're out of food.
Sokka (alarmed): Guys, wait, this was in my dream, we shouldn't go to the market.
Katara: What happened in your dream?

(Cut to Sokka. His eyes are bugged out in fright, and camera zooms in on him and rotates slightly. The background turns a sickly green and an eerie sound effect is heard.)

Sokka: Food eats people!

(Cut to Katara and Aang who are not impressed, then back to Sokka with Momo on his right.)

Sokka: Also, Momo could talk. (To Momo.) You said some very unkind things.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the ocean. A flock of birds fly by as the screen pans left to reveal Prince Zuko's ship steaming towards the southeast corner of the screen. Cut to the main deck where Iroh is sniffing the air in the foreground and Zuko is looking out of a telescope in the background.)

Iroh: There is a storm coming. A big one.
Zuko (lowering the telescope): You're out of your mind, Uncle. The weather's perfect. There is not a cloud in sight.
Iroh: The storm is approaching from the north. I suggest we alter our course and head southwest.
Zuko: We know the Avatar is traveling northward, so we will do the same.
Iroh: Prince Zuko, consider the safety of the crew.
Zuko: The safety of the crew doesn't matter!

(Zuko's eyebrow goes up in concern as a crewmember enters from the left in the background. Cut to a close up of the Lieutenant, who has clearly overhead Zuko's remark and is unhappy. Zuko, realizing this, begins to speak to the Lieutenant and walk up until his face is right in front of the Lieutenant's.)

Zuko: Finding the Avatar is far more important than any individual's safety.

(Zuko enters the ship and shuts the hatch behind him. Iroh stands next to the Lieutenant.)

Iroh: He doesn't mean that, he's just all worked up.

(Cut to a harbor scene, where Appa lies in the water next to one of the jetties as if he were a ship. The scene is quickly followed by a shot of Katara examining a fruit at a produce stand in the harbor. The shopkeeper is clearly exasperated at Katara's suspicion of the fruit's quality.)

Shopkeeper: Ah, it's good! It's perfect, I'm telling you!

(Katara shakes the fruit which makes a swishing sound.)

Katara: I don't know if I like the sound of that swishing.

(The shopkeeper comes around the stand to face Katara. Aang and Sokka wait to the left of the produce stand. Sokka carries a basket of fruit.)

Shopkeeper: Swishing means it's ripe! It's the ripe juices swishing around, eh?
Aang: I think it's true, Katara, swishing means it's ripe.
Katara (putting fruit back): I just realized we're out of money anyway.
Shopkeeper (grabbing basket from Sokka): Awww!

(The shopkeeper kicks Sokka as he walks by. Cut to the dock, where the three stand, Sokka rubbing the sport where he was kicked. An old fisherman and his wife walk behind them in the background, the camera slowlu panning left to keep them in the frame longer.)

Sokka (depressed): Out of food and out of money, now what are we supposed to do?
Katara: You could get a job, smart guy.

(In the background, the old woman grabs the old man by the shoulder. They begin a conversation amongst themselves, but overheard by Aang, Katara and Sokka.)

Old Woman: We shouldn't go out there! Please, the fish can wait. There's going to be a terrible storm.
Old Man: Ahh, you're crazy! It's a nice day. No clouds, no wind, no nothing, so quit you're naggin' woman.

Aang (to Katara and Sokka): Maybe we should find some shelter?
Sokka: Are you kidding? Shelter from what?

(The old man and woman continue their argument.)

Old Woman: My joints say there's going to be a storm! A bad one.
Old Man: Well, it's your joints against my brain.
Old Woman: Then I hope your brain can find someone else to haul that fish, cause I ain't comin!
Old Man: Then I'll find a new fish hauler and pay him double what you get! How do you like that?
Sokka (running up to them): I'll go!
Old Man (pointing at Sokka): You're hired!
Sokka (to his friends): What? You said ‘get a job' and he's paying double.
Old Man (looking at Sokka as if he were an alien): Double? Who told ya that nonsense?

(Cut to Zuko's ship on the ocean, camera panning right to reveal the black edges of an ominous storm. Zuko's ship is making straight for it. Cut to Zuko walking on deck. Four crewman, including the Lieutenant from before, are there looking at the storm clouds. The Lieutenant turns, folding his arms across his chest, to address the Prince.)

Lieutenant Jee: Uh! Looks like your uncle was right about the storm after all.
Iroh (entering from left): Lucky guess.
Zuko (crossing to the Lieutenant): Lieutenant, you'd better learn some respect, (pointing at his chest with two fingers) or I will teach it to you.

(Zuko walks past the Lieutenant, who can no longer contain his contempt for the Prince. As the Lieutenant speaks, Iroh is visible in the background making decapitation motions with his hand, trying to head off the conflict.)

Lieutenant Jee: What do you know about respect? The way you talk to everyone around here, from your hard working crew to your esteemed uncle shows you know nothing about respect. You don't care about anyone but yourself! Then again, what should I expect from a spoiled prince?

(Zuko stops in mid step shortly into the Lieutenant's speech. Iroh sighs and puts his hand over his face, resigning himself to the brewing disaster. By the end of the tirade, Prince Zuko's eyebrow is twitching. He is clearly stung by the accusations. He turns and assumes a firebending stance, the Lieutenant follows suit.)

Iroh (hands up in gesture of calming): Easy now.

(Cut to Zuko and the Lieutenant's hands crossing at the wrists, indicating that the ritual of combat has begun. When they cross, the sound of steel on steel is heard and smoke curls from where they meet. Iroh appears between them and breaks their wrists apart is neat movement.)

Iroh: Enough! We are all a bit tired from being at sea so long. I'm sure after a bowl of noodles everyone will feel much better.

(The Prince and the Lieutenant glare at each other a moment longer, then both turn and walk away in opposite directions.)

Zuko (to Iroh): I don't need your help keeping order on my ship.

(Iroh places a hand on Zuko's shoulder, but Zuko rudely shove him off. Zuko walks to the bow, where it is clear the storm clouds now fill the sky. Cut back to harbor where Appa still wallows in the water. Cut to Aang in the foreground, Sokka loading a fishing boat in the background. Aang looks worriedly at the sky, which is clearly full of black storm clouds. The wind has picked up as well.)

Aang: Sokka, maybe this isn't such a good idea. Look at the sky.
Sokka: I said I was gonna do this job. I can't back out just because of some bad weather.
Old Woman (from o.c., then from wider shot of boat): The boy with the tattoos has some sense. You should listen to him!

(Cut to close up of the old man as he puts down some boxes on the ship. A question forms in his mind.)

Old Man: Boy with tattoos? (He turns to Aang and looks at him). Airbender tattoos...well I'll be a hogmonkey's uncle! You're the Avatar, ain't ya?

(Cut to Aang with Katara close behind him to his left.)

Katara (smiling, hands on hips): That's right.
Old Man: Well don't be so smiley about it. The Avatar disappeared for a hundred years. (Jabbing Aang's chest with his forefinger). You turned your back on the world!
Katara (coming to Aang's side, angry): Don't yell at him! Aang would never turn his back on anyone!
Old Man: Oh? He wouldn't, uh? Then I guess I must have imagined the last hundred years of war and suffering.

(As the Old Man makes this damning pronouncement, cut to Aang with the distorted camera effect of the world warping around him, a visual testimonial to the sickening guilt welling up within the Avatar. Cut to Katara stepping in front of Aang so that she is between him and the Old Man. She is irate.)

Katara: Aang is the bravest person I know! He has done nothing but help people and save lives since I met him. It's not his fault he disappeared, right Aang? Aang? What's wrong?

(Aang has been backing up while Katara has been telling off the old man. When she is finished, he flees, opening his glider and taking off towards the mountains.)

Old Man: That's right! Keep flyin!
Katara: You're a horrible old man!
Old Man: Ehh.
Katara (mounting Appa): Appa, yip! Yip!

(Katara and Appa take off, drenching the old man. Sokka emerges from the hold just as the old man shakes off the excess water.)

Sokka: Hey, they left without saying goodbye!
Old Man: You're friends ain't too polite, are they?
Sokka: I know! This one time I was...
Old Man (handing Sokka a box): Yeh, yeh, yeh, yeh, get below deck.

(Fade to commercial break.)



Act II

(When the show returns, the camera shows a longshot of Appa skirting a mountain face at high speed. The sky is now black with storm clouds and it is pouring rain. Cut to a closer shot of Katara in Appa's ‘driver's seat', shielding her eyes as she searches for Aang in the rain. The shot swivels as Katara and Appa pass, showing a cave in the rock face with an exposed parapet and a stone staircase leading up to it from the shoreline below. Cut to a shot from the inside of the cave looking out where the storm is intensifying. Katara enters, wiping the water off her sleeves. She stands still, seeing something in front of her. The shot widens to show Aang in the foreground, farther back in the cave. He is sitting with his hands in his lap, looking downcast. He will not turn to look at Katara.)

Aang: I'm sorry for running away.
Katara: It's ok. That fisherman was way out of line.
Aang: Actually, he wasn't.
Katara: What do you mean?
Aang: I don't wanna talk about it.
Katara: It has to do with your dream, doesn't it?

(Katara walks over to Aang, kneels by him and puts a hand on his shoulder.)

Katara: Talk to me.
Aang: Well, it's kind of a long story.

(Suddenly, Momo runs back, chittering, and the sound of a huge animal is heard from behind Aang towards the cave entrance. Appa's nose and bangs appear from the right, nudging Aang. Cut to a full shot towards the cave entrance, which is now completely plugged with a sopping Appa.)

Katara: I'm gonna try to get a little fire going.

(Aang strokes Appa's chin, then cut to Katara stoking a little cheery fire on the right, Aang on the left with Momo in his lap. When Aang begins to speak the camera pans up and enters a dreamy flashback sequence.)

Aang: I'll never forget the day the monks told me I was the Avatar.

(The pan up changes quickly from the rock of the cave to an outdoor shot of the Southern Air Temple in its heyday. A stone plaza is populated with many young airbenders playing games, a flying bison soars in the distance.)

Aang: I was playing with some other kids just outside the south wall. I was trying to teach them how to do the air scooter...

(Cut to a shot of Aang addressing a group of young airbenders. Most seem Aang's age or younger, one is taller and probably older. Aang demonstrates the air scooter move.)

Aang: First, you form a ball. Then you gotta get on quick.

(Aang makes an air ball and sits on it fast. He laughs and begins to move at terrific speed across the plaza. He goes upside down in a nearby archway under a walking bridge, then climbs a wall and gets up on to the bridge, coming back to the plaza by a nearby set of stairs. Aang exclaims “yeh!” and “woohoo!” as he travels. Cut to the older boy, who readies his own attempt.)

Older Boy: Okay! Here goes! (He makes a ball.)
Aang: Quick, get on!
Older Boy: Wh, wh, whoaaaa! (He wobbles and is thrown.) Ugh!
Aang (dismounting his own scooter): You kinda have to balance on it like it's a top. (He twirls his finger to demonstrate.)
Older Boy: Man, that's hard.

(A young boy enters the screen from the left and tugs at Aang's shoulder.)

Young Boy: Where'd ya learn that trick, Aang?
Aang: I made it up.
Young Boy (doing a goofy dance): Wow!

(Screen pans left to show five elderly airbender monks on the stones steps leading up to the bridge. Monk Gyatso is one of them.)

Monk Gyatso: Aang, come with us. We need to speak with you.

(Cut to Aang, who obeys with a look of trepidation on his face, the other kids looking at him strangely. Cut to a chamber in the Air Temple where the five elder monks sit cross-legged and serene on five evenly spaced stools. The middle monk's stool rests under an ornate parasol; he is likely the leader or abbot of the monastery. Monk Gyatso is the second from the left. Aang kneels in front of them, head down, his back to the camera. He lifts his head to address them.)

Aang: How do you know it's me?
Elder Monk #4: We have known you were the Avatar for some time. Do you remember these?

(The fourth monk on the right who has just spoken reveals a rolled up package, which he airbends over to Aang. It lands at his feet and rolls open of its own accord. Inside are four children's toys. On the left is a little toy turtle. Second from the left is a propeller toy. Third from the left is a little monkey or donkey. The fourth is rattle type object with yellow and red swirls on its face.)

Aang: Those were some of my favorite toys when I was little! (He picks up the propeller toy.)
Elder Monk #4: You chose them from among thousands of toys, Aang. The toys you picked were the four Avatar relics. These items belonged to Avatars past. Your own past lives.
Aang: I just chose them because they seemed fun.

(He smiles and pulls the cord on the propeller toy, sending the propeller spinning into the air. It spins through the air and the scene cuts back to a close view of the five monks.)

Elder Monk #4: You chose them because they were familiar.
Monk Gyatso: Normally we would have told you of your identity when you turned 16, but there are troubling signs, storm clouds are gathering.
Abbot: I fear that war may be upon us, young Avatar.
Monk Gyatso: We need you, Aang.

(Aang lowers his head, his responsibility crushing him. His head stays lowered, but the flashback ends. His head remains lowered in the present as well. Cut to a wider shot of Aang on the left, Katara on the right, the fire between them. Katara looks on him with concern and sympathy. Cut to Zuko's ship navigating the storm, then cut to the Lieutenant from the earlier confrontation lowering a cup he has taken a drink from. He is inside the ship somewhere, his face bathed in firelight.)

Lieutenant Jee: I'm sick of taking his orders and I'm tired of chasing his Avatar!

(Cut to the Lieutenant sitting at a table and addressing a crewman on his left, making wide hand gestures to drive home his point.)

Lieutenant Jee: I mean who does Zuko think he is?
Iroh (from o.c.): Do you really want to know?

(Cut to a view of the crewmen sitting around a fire barrel from a point at the top of the stairs from the upper deck. The Lieutenant and the three other crewman at the fire barrel stand in respect.)

Lieutenant Jee: General Iroh! We were just –
Iroh (entering from left, with a hand raised in acceptance): It's ok. May I join you?
Lieutenant Jee: Of course, sir!

(Iroh approaches and sits down with the men. He strokes his beard and begins to speak.)

Iroh: Try to understand, my nephew is a complicated young man. He has been through much...

(Fade to a flashback of a younger Zuko, without his trademark scar. His look of determination, however, has not changed. He walks down a hall to a pair of Fire Nation guards who block his attempt to enter the room beyond.)

Zuko (in a higher voice than we are used to): Let me in! (Iroh appears from the left, putting his hands on the young man's shoulders.)
Iroh: Prince Zuko, what's wrong?
Zuko: I want to go into the war chamber, but the guard won't let me pass!

(Zuko's voice breaks slightly at the end. He is clearly disappointed. Iroh leads him a short distance away from the guards.)

Iroh: You're not missing anything, trust me. These meetings are dreadfully boring.
Zuko: If I'm gonna rule this nation one day, don't you think I need to start learning as much as I can?
Iroh: Very well. But you must promise not to speak. These old folks are a bit sensitive, you know.
Zuko (bowing to Iroh): Thank you uncle!

(Iroh puts him around Zuko's shoulders and walks him past the guards, who make no move to stop them. Cut to a wide shot of the war chamber. It is a temple like chamber, with a throne on a dais, wreathed in fire. The back wall is occupied by some sort of huge, ornately carved red statue. The screen pans down to the show the war council in session. Fire Nation generals sit around a map of the Earth Kingdom continent that adorns the floor. One of the generals on the left is standing to address the general staff.)

General: The Earth Kingdom defenses are concentrated here.

(Cut to a view from the throne, where the Fire Lord is watching the generals discuss the situation, the cut back to the speaker.)

General: A dangerous battalion of their strongest earthbenders and fiercest warriors, so I am recommending the 41st division.
Old General: But the 41st is entirely new recruits. How do you expect them to defeat a powerful Earth Kingdom battalion?
General (coldly): I don't. They'll be used as a distraction while we mount an attack from the rear. What better to use as bait then fresh meat?
Zuko (jumping up): You can't sacrifice an entire division like that! Those soldiers love and defend our nation! How can you betray them?

(Cut to a view down the map as the generals look back to Zuko, clearly disapproving of Zuko's outburst. The scene fades to the present where Iroh continue his story to the crewmen.)

Iroh: Zuko was right, you see, but it was not his place to speak out, and there were... dire consequences.

(Cut to overhead shot of Iroh and the crewmen around the table. Iroh lowers his head in sadness at the memory. The scenes fades, replaced by an overhead shot of Aang, Appa and Katara around the fire.)

Katara: So you were upset that you were the Avatar? Why wouldn't you be excited about it?
Aang: Well, I didn't know how to feel about it. All I knew is that after I found out, everything began changing...

(Fade to another flashback at the plaza near the south wall of the Southern Air Temple. This time the plaza is full of young airbenders riding on air scooters, laughing, and having fun.)

Aang: Hey, not bad! You guys have been practicing!
Young Boy (scooting around Aang): Not only that, we made up a game you can play with the air scooters!
Aang: Great!

(Aang makes his own air scooter, but the young boy looks confused and a bit alarmed. He stops his scooter. The shot widens to show the other young airbenders stopping their scooters as well.)

Aang (dismayed): What's going on?
Older Boy (unhappy, but without malice): Now that you're the Avatar, it's kind of an unfair advantage for whichever team you're on.
Aang (trying to smile): But I'm still the same – nothing's changed. So, what, I can't play?
Older Boy: That's the only fair way.
Aang (dismounting his scooter): Oh, ok.
Young Boy: Sorry, Aang.

(The young airbenders look upon as he retreats from them, sadness in their eyes. The older boy turns to address them.)

Older Boy: Okay, now who wants to have Jinju on their team?

(Screen pans right to reveal a dirty looking airbender boy with a stupid grin on his face who makes an equally stupid noise. Cut to a view of Aang and Gyatso playing Pai Sho through an exterior window. Then a close up of Aang, who absentmidndely moves a token on the board. He is sad and distracted.)

Monk Gyatso: Very interesting move, young one.
Aang: What do you mean?

(Behind his back, Monk Gyatso begins to bend air in an arch over his head and behind Aang. The wind blows Aang's hood up over his face, giving the old monk time to switch a few pieces before Aang can remove the hood.)

Aang (pointing at the board): Hey!

(Both begin to laugh. The door opens to reveal one of the other monk elders, in fact the one who had been sitting fourth from the right in the prior scene.)

Elder Monk #4: You're playing games with him? The Avatar should be training.
Monk Gyatso: Aang has already trained enough for today.
Elder Monk #4: Time is short. Come with me. I must test you on some high level techniques.

(Aang gets up and begins to follow the Elder out of the room. Monk Gyatso then raises his hand in a gesture of cessation.)

Monk Gyatso: No, as long as I am his guardian, I will decide when he trains and when he gets his butt kicked at Pai Sho.
Elder Monk #4 (close up, clearly angry): Huh!

(The Elder Monk stalks off as Aang turns to smile at Monk Gyatso. The flashback ends as an overhead shot of the cave scene returns. This scene then fades to be replaced by Iroh's face.)

Iroh: After Zuko's outburst in the meeting, the Fire Lord became very angry with him. He said that Prince Zuko's challenge of the general was an act of complete disrespect, and there was only one way to resolve this...
Lieutenant Jee (horrified): Agni kai. A fire duel.
Iroh: That's right. Zuko looked upon the old general he had insulted and declared that he was not afraid. But Zuko misunderstood. When he turned to face his opponent, he was surprised to see it was not the General. Zuko had spoken out against a general's plan, but by doing so in the Fire Lord's war room, it was the Fire Lord whom he had disrespected. Zuko would have to duel his own father.

(In the midst of Iroh's story we see Zuko in a rectangular arena with a large crowd on either side. He drops his ceremonial cloak to the floor, exposing his bare chest. He turns to face his opponent, and, recognizing him, freezes in horror. The scene then cuts to the cave with Aang and Katara.)

Aang: Then, just when I was starting to feel better, something worse happened.

(Aang's flashback resumes, this time of Monk Gyatso and Elder Monk #4 standing in front of the monk who sits on the middle stool under the parasol, presumably the abbot.)

Monk Gyatso: Aang needs to have freedom and fun. He needs to grow up as a normal boy.
Elder Monk #4: Humph! You cannot keep protecting him from his destiny.
Abbot: Gyatso, I know you mean well, but you are letting your affection for the boy cloud your judgment.
Monk Gyatso: All I want is what is best for him.
Abbot: But what we need is what's best for the world. (Looking down for a moment before raising his head to continue) You and Aang must be separated. The Avatar will be sent away to the Eastern Air Temple to complete his training.

(Monk Gyatso bows as the camera zooms past him to reveal Aang eavesdropping through a hole in the ceiling, his eyes alarmed and distraught. Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(Show returns to a shot from inside the cave looking out. It is still pouring. The camera pans left back to Appa, Katara and Aang around the fire.)

Katara: That's awful, Aang. I don't know what to say.

(Katara tries to put her hand on his shoulder, but he gets up, angry.)

Aang: How could they do that to me! They wanted to take away everything I knew and everyone I loved!

(Aang's avatar spirit begins to activate, the arrow tattoos on his body beginning to glow and the energy shell seen in “The Southern Air Temple” beginning to form around him. He shuts it down however as Katara cries out as cinders from the fire swirl around her.)

Katara: Whoa! Hot cinders!
Aang (his glow fading): I'm sorry I got so mad.
Katara: You have a right to be angry after the monks sent you away like that.
Aang: Well, that's not exactly what happened...

(Aang's looks downcast and guilty as the camera zooms past his left shoulder. The flashback then continues, showing an overhead shot of the young airbender monks hard at play on their air scooters back at the south wall. The shot zooms backwards to reveal that we are seeing the kids from Aang's p.o.v. – he is watching them from a window high up in the Temple. He is sad and clearly longs to be normal again. While Aang narrates to Katara, the Aang in the flashback leaves his window and flops dejectedly on his bed.)

Aang (from o.c., narrating from the present): I was afraid and confused. I didn't know what to do.

(The scene fades to a night scene in the hallway outside of Aang's bedroom. Monk Gyatso approaches, knocks and enters.)

Monk Gyatso: Aang, I'm not going to let them take you away from me. Aang?

(Gyatso sees a rolled up scroll on Aang's bed. He picks it up and opens it, his eyes going wide in concern. He draws an intake of breath to look at the window where it is storming violently. The camera pans across the storm tossed ocean as Aang narrates again from the present.)

Aang: I never saw Gyatso again.

(The flashback continues with Aang's and Appa's plunge into the sea during the storm, activation of Aang's avatar spirit and subsequent encasement in ice.)

Aang: Next thing I knew, I was waking up in your arms after you found me in the iceberg.

(The flashback ends. Aang looks vacantly across the fire, a slightly guilty expression still settled on his face.)

Katara: You ran away.
Aang (looking up at Katara): And then the Fire Nation attacked our temple. My people needed me and I wasn't there to help.
Katara: You don't know what would've –
Aang: The world needed me and I wasn't there to help.
Katara: Aang...
Aang: The fisherman was right! I did turn my back on the world.
Katara: You're being too hard on yourself. Even if you did run away, I think it was meant to be. If you had stayed you would have been killed along with all the other airbenders.
Aang: You don't know that.
Katara: I know it's meant to be this way. The world needs you now. You give people hope.

(Aang slowly smiles, raising his head to look at her, an expression of hope spreading across his face. Momo hops over to Aang and chitters. Fade back to the fire lit chamber on Zuko's ship, where Iroh continues his story.)

Iroh: When Prince Zuko saw that it was his father who had come to duel him, he begged for mercy...

(While Iroh speaks, the scene cuts to view of Iroh's face through the fire that burns in the fire barrel around which the crewman sit. When his voice trails off, the flashback continues where we left off, with an overhead shot of Zuko in the rectangular arena. A much larger opponent, silhouetted, advances slowly on Zuko. Cut to a side view of the horrified Zuko.)

Zuko: Please, father, I only had the fire nation's best interest at heart! I'm sorry I spoke out of turn!

(Cut to a closer shot of the advancing Fire Lord, still silhouetted against the fires burning around the arena. He too is shirtless, but built massively.)

Fire Lord Ozai: You will fight for your honor.
Zuko (stricken, abasing himself on the floor): I meant you no disrespect. I am your loyal son.
Fire Lord Ozai: Rise and fight, Prince Zuko!
Zuko: I won't fight you.
Fire Lord Ozai: You will learn respect, and suffering will be your teacher.

(The Fire Lord now stands a few feet from Zuko, as the Prince raises his tear filled face to his father. Cut to a close up of some spectators. They are familiar. Many in the background are generals from the war council. The three in the foreground are, from left, a grinning Admiral Zhao (then either Captain or Commander), General Iroh, looking fearful for his nephew, and a cruel looking young girl in a soldier's uniform who is clearly hoping for the worst to befall Prince Zuko. This is Azula, Zuko's sister, as the audience learns at the end of the season finale for Book One. She raises her left fist in anticipation of the disgrace her brother is undergoing. Iroh's looks away in despair.)

Iroh: I looked away.

(The spectators are illuminated by flame, Zuko's scream of anguish is heard in the background, and the camera zooms to a close up of Iroh. The flashback ends, but Iroh's face in the present is in the same pose as it was when Zuko was scarred. It is clearly an unpleasant memory.)

Lieutenant Jee (abashed): I always thought that Prince Zuko was in a training accident...
Iroh: It was no accident. After the duel, the Fire Lord said that by refusing to fight, Zuko had shown shameful weakness. As punishment he was banished and sent to capture the Avatar. Only then could he return with his honor.
Lieutenant Jee: So that's why he's so obsessed. Capturing the Avatar is the only chance he has of things returning to normal.
Iroh: Things will never return to normal. But the important thing is, the Avatar gives Zuko hope.

(Cut to a shot of Zuko's back. He is in darkness, except the flame on the altar in front of him. The flame is blocked by his body so he is silhouetted. A flashback appears in a still frame. It of two young children running across the crest of a hillside, an older man, their father, follows behind. The colors are drab, but the children look happy. The scene cuts quickly back to Zuko in front of the altar, and then to another flashback. This one is a close of a young boy, Zuko, perhaps at Aang's age, standing on that same hillcrest with his father next to him. His father's hand is on his shoulder. Cut back to Zuko at the altar again, and then back to the previous flashback, except this time from the front, showing a much younger Zuko, clearly smiling and happy. The music becomes serious though, as the flashback fades around the boy's face, replaced by the face of Zuko from the present, scarred and unhappy. Zuko turns as a lightning strike is hears, cut to a shot of the ship in the storm, lightening striking the bridge. Cut to the cave where Aang and Katar turn to look at someone entering the cave, the storm still raging outside.)

Old Woman: Help! Oh, please help!
Katara (rushing to her side): It's ok, you're safe.

(Both walk back to the fire deeper in the cave.)

Old Woman: But, my husband isn't.
Katara: What do you mean? Where's Sokka?
Old Woman: They haven't returned. They should've been back by now, and this storm is becoming a typhoon. They're caught out at sea.
Aang (standing, resolute): I'm going to find them.
Katara: I'm going with you.
Old Woman: I'm staying here!

(Cut to exterior shot of cave, where the weather is horrible. Appa's nose is sticking out of the cave; he is ready to take off. Cut to Aang and Katara getting on to Appa. Aang turns to the old woman.)

Aang (to the old woman): We'll be back soon, I promise.

(Cut to Appa flying away from the cave, and then a quick cut to Zuko's ship battling the waves. Cut again to Zuko and the Lieutenant struggling to stay upright on the ship's main deck. Water drenches them and the deck repeatedly.)

Zuko: Where were we hit?
Lieutenant Jee: I don't know!
Iroh: Look!

(Iroh points up to the bridge tower. A crewman hangs off some of the rigging.)

Zuko: The helmsman!

(Cut to Zuko climbing the external ladder up to the bridge area, the Lieutenant behind him. Cut to the deck, where Iroh senses something. A lighting strike flares, but Iroh bends the lightning through his body, away from the men trying to rescue the helmsman and forces it to strike open water. Cut back to Iroh, smoking and looking confused, but otherwise undamaged. Cut back to the helmsman who finally lets go with a cry. He falls for a moment, but a hand grabs him. Zuko and the Lieutenant have worked together to save him. Cut to Katara and Aang flying on Appa in the storm.)

Katara: Where are they?
Aang: Come on, Appa!

(Aang sees a massive wall of water up ahead. It towers above them. Appa can't pull up in time, but they bust through its crest with a combination of Appa's strength and Aang using his staff like a helicopter blade to part the water. In the distance they see a small boat, silhouetted by lighting strikes.)

Aang (pointing to the horizon): The boat! It's there!

(Cut to a longshot of Appa flying in the clouds, then a quick cut to Zuko, Iroh and the Lieutenant, who can clearly see Appa in turn.)

Zuko: The Avatar!
Lieutenant Jee: What do you want to do, sir?
Zuko (pausing to consider): Let him go. We need to get this ship to safety.
Iroh: Then we must head directly into the eye of the storm.

(Iroh smiles slightly as the screen pans left to show Zuko and the crew looking out over the bow. Then cut to Sokka and the old man struggling to pilot the fishing boat.)

Sokka: I'm too young to die!
Old Man: I'm not, but I still don't wanna!

(Cut to a longshot of the fishing boat struggling against the waves. Appa flies in close and Aang jumps onto the boat. Lighting strikes the main mast which breaks off. It is about to hit Aang, but he splits it in two, the halves falling harmlessly on either side of him. Sokka has a rope in his hands, which Aang grabs.)

Aang: Hang on to the rope!

(Aang airbends himself back onto Appa, pulling Sokka and the old man with him. Both land on Appa as well, the old man spitting out some water and smile sheepishly. Behind them a shadow appears and the sound of rushing water is heard. The view widens to show a wave building behind them much larger than even the one shown before. Appa tries to escape, but the wave is too fast. They are submerged. In a sequence that is eerily similar to the scene where he freezed himself, Aang drifts away from Appa and his friends in the water. His avatar spirit activates, but in a departure from the previous encounter, instead of creating an iceberg, he surrounds himself and his friends with a ball of energy and raises them back up out of the water and into the sky. Cut to Zuko and the crew on the deck of the ship. They have reached the eye of the storm, which they can see above them. The wind has died down and it is drizzling.)

Zuko: Uncle, I am sorry.
Iroh (smiling, putting a hand on his nephew's shoulder): Your apology is accepted.

(The Avatar's bubble of energy erupts from the sea in boiling blue mass in front of the prow of Zuko's ship and rockets into the air. Cut to Aang looking back at the ship, and cut to Zuko looking up from the deck and the camera angle widens, indicating that we are seeing the receding Zuko from Aang's viewpoint. Cut the reverse, as Appa recedes up into the eye. Cut to Appa now standing out in the drizzle on the parapet outside the cave where Aang had told Katara his story. Cut to Aang and the old man at the cave entrance, the old woman running to embrace her husband.)

Old Woman: Oh, you're alive! (Voice turning sour and pointing to Aang) You owe this boy an apology.
Aang: He doesn't have to apologize.
Old Man: Mmm, uh, what if instead of an apology I give him a free fish and we call it even?
Aang: Actually, I don't eat meat.
Old Man: Fish ain't meat.
Sokka (holding out his hand): Seriously, you're still gonna pay me, right?

(The old man drops a fish into his outstretched hand with a wet smacking sound. Sokka makes a frightened sound. Cut to Aang and Katara.)

Aang: Katara, I think you were right before. I'm done dwelling on the past.
Katara: Really?
Aang: I can't make guesses about how things would have turned out if I hadn't run away. I'm here now and I'm going to make the most of it.
Katara (smiling): I don't think you're gonna have those nightmares anymore.
Old Man (entering from left and putting his hand on Aang's shoulder): Uh, if you weren't here now, well, I guess I wouldn't be either. Thank you for saving my life, Avatar.

(Cut to Sokka looking out of the cave entrance.)

Sokka: Do you hear that? It's stopped raining.

(Cut to longshot of outside, where the sun is starting to break through. The shot widens to show the parapet where Appa and the rest are now standing. Appa shakes himself off, drenching everyone.)

Everyone: Appa!



[End Credits]
Act I

(The episode begins with a night scene. A bird, one of the red hawk like birds seen at the beginning of "The Spirit World, Part 1", flies through the moonless night sky and cries out. Cut to a shot of the upper reaches of a Fire Nation fortress. The shot pans down to reveal several towers connected by the walls of the fortress. All are manned and have fires burning in them. Pan left to reveal Fire Nation ships in the water beyond the fortress. Cut to a shot of several fierce looking archers, their faces painted either for decoration, camouflage or both. They release volley after volley of arrows which strike their archery range targets dead center. Successive arrows split the one already occupying the bulls eye right down the middle of its shaft. Shift to wide shot of the archers which pans up to one of the fortress towers where two men stand side by side watching the archers.)

Colonel Shinu: Absolutely not. The Yu Yan archers stay here. Your request is denied Commander Zhao.
Zhao: Colonel Shinu, please reconsider. Their precision is legendary. The Yu Yan can pin a fly to a tree from a hundred yards away – without killing it. You're wasting their talents using them as mere security guards.
Colonel Shinu: I can do whatever I want with their talents. They're my archers and what I say goes.
Zhao: But my search for the Avatar is –
Colonel Shinu: – Is nothing but a vanity project! We're fighting a real war here and I need every man I've got, Commander.
Zhao: But –
Colonel Shinu: That's final! I don't want to hear another word about it.

(Zhao grumbles, then cut to the red bird seen earlier swooping down into the tower. It lands on Colonel Shinu's outstretched arm. He unties a message from its back and it flies away. Cut to a view of the Colonel that shows Zhao behind him. The Colonel's expression turns to horror as he reads the message. Zhao approaches from behind and he hands the message to Zhao.)

Zhao: News from Fire Lord Ozai? (Smiles.) It appears I've been promoted to Admiral. My request is now an order.

(Colonel Shinu bows and exits. Cut to the archers firing again at their targets, then cut back to Zhao looking over the railing of the tower at the archers. The screen pans up and zooms in to reveal a figure in a blue mask sitting atop the tower, listening, who then exits. Fade to a scene of a hillside strewn with broken boulders. The dawn is approaching, but the sky is cloudy so it is still quite dark. The screen pans down to reveal the remnants of a decaying ghost town. A cough is heard, then cut to an overhead shot of Sokka in his sleeping bag resting on Appa, Aang and Katara are facing him. A fire burns in the background. They appear to be inside an enclosed, temple like structure overlooking the decaying town below and the hillside beyond. Cut to a close shot of Sokka coughing, Momo playing around his head and Katara wiping his forehead with a wet cloth.)

Katara: This should bring your fever down.
Sokka (feverishly): You know what I love about Appa the most? His sense of humor.
Katara: That's nice. I'll tell him.

(Cut to a wider shot as Appa grunts at Sokka in response.)

Sokka: Haha! Classic Appa.
Aang (walking over): How's Sokka doing?
Katara: Not so good. Being out in that storm really did a number on him.

(Cut to Sokka shivering in his sleeping bag and snorting back his runny nose. Cut back to Sokka's p.o.v.)

Aang: I couldn't find any ginger root for the tea, but I found a map.

(Aang produces a scroll. Cut to a side view of Aang, the mountains visible in the backdrop, as he spreads out the scroll on the ground.)

Aang: There's an herbalist institute on the top of that mountain. We could probably find a cure for Sokka there.
Katara: Aang, he's in no condition to travel. Sokka just needs more rest. I'm sure he'll be better by tomorrow.

(Katara begins to cough at this.)

Aang: Not you too!
Katara: Relax, it was just a little cough. I'm fine –

(She cuts herself off with more coughing. Cut back to Aang, shielding himself from her violent coughing.)

Aang: That's how Sokka started yesterday. Now look at him – he thinks he's an earthbender!
Sokka (swinging at something that isn't there): Take that, you rock!
Aang: A few more hours and you'll be talking nonsense too. (Getting up and grabbing his staff.) I'm going to find some medicine.

(He opens his glider and walks to the edge of the temple. A huge flash of lightning illuminates Aang and the exterior of the temple. He twirls his glider shut and leans it against the wall of the temple.)

Aang: Uh, maybe it's safer if I go on foot. (Cut back to Appa et al, Aang continues from o.c.) Keep an eye on'em guys.

(Appa grunts in reply.)

Sokka (deliriously): Haha! You guys are killin' me!

(Aang turns and launches himself into the air, landing far down the hill the temple sits on. Cut to p.o.v. form somewhere in the decayed town. Aang zooms by at high speed, using his airbending to accelerate his running speed. Cut to a shot of Zuko's ship steaming through water with land visible behind it. Cut again to Zuko standing over his Lieutenant's shoulder. They are both looking at something.)

Lieutenant Jee: We haven't been able to pick up the Avatar's trail since the storm.

(Cut to a map of the world that they are both looking at. The position of the Lieutenant's hand and extended index finger indicate that they are currently at the northwest extremity of the Earth Kingdom, close to the eastern most extremity of the northern air nomad lands.)

Lieutenant Jee: But, if we continue heading northeast –

(The Lieutenant is cut off as the light is blocked by an enormous shadow. Cut to wider view of the bridge where Iroh and some crewman are playing Pai Sho on the right. Another Fire Navy ship, a massive hulking thing, is passing them to starboard, headed the opposite direction. Everyone on Zuko's bridge stares at it.)

Zuko: What do they want?
Iroh (hopefully): Perhaps a sporting game of Pai Sho!

(Cut to a brief shot of Zuko's ship resting alongside the much larger, double-smoke stack Fire Nation vessel. Switch to a scroll being unrolled to reveal a drawn figure of Aang and some writing in Asian calligraphy. Cut to a shot behind the herald who is holding up the "wanted" poster. Zuko is in front of him, looking sour.)

Herald: The hunt for the Avatar has been given prime importance. (He lowers the scroll.) All information regarding the Avatar must be reported directly to Admiral Zhao.
Iroh (making a move on the Pai Sho board): Zhao has been promoted? Well, good for him!

(Iroh's opponent looks chagrined at the move and slaps his face. Cut to Zuko.)

Zuko (sullenly): I've got nothing to report to Zhao. Now get off my ship and let us pass.
Herald: Admiral Zhao is not allowing ships in or out of this area.
Zuko (angrily): Off my ship!

(Cut to Iroh, with the Herald and his two guards behind him. They leave as Iroh smiles.)

Iroh: Excellent! (He leans forward and gathers all the chips on the table)ake the pot. But, you're all improving. I'm certain you will win if we play again.

Cut to Zuko looking out over the waves as Iroh and the men begin another game in the background behind him. Cut to a view of a mountain path. The screen pans right to reveal a Fire Nation lookout post, the switch to a view inside the post. One of the lookouts is looking out with a telescope, another is reading Aang's wanted poster.)

Reading Lookout: Says here that the Avatar can create tornados and run faster than the wind. Pretty amazing.
Telescope Lookout (looking back at his colleague): Ehh, that's just a bunch of Fire Lord propaganda. There's no way that's true.

(The telescope lookout returns to his instrument, where we cut to his p.o.v. through the telescope. He has a view of three bends in the mountain pass. In a flash a cloud of dust rockets through the bend farthest away, then the next and finally past the lookout itself. The rush of wind and dust is tremendous. The lookouts blink their eyes and then the telescope lookout blows his horn to the sky. Pan up to the empty sky, quickly replaced by an exterior shot of the abandoned temple where Appa et al are resting. Cut to Sokka, still shaking feverishly in his sleeping bag.)

Sokka: Katara... please... water...

(Camera pans left to Katara, now obviously sick, resting on Appa too. Momo stands in front of her.)

Katara: Listen carefully, Momo. I need you to take this to the river and fill it with water.

(Katara has raised up the water bag around her neck, offering it to Momo. Cut to a close of Momo's expressive green eyes, which blink. He is trying to understand her. He chitters. Cut to Momo's p.o.v. He sees Katara making walking motions with her fingers and hears her yammering at him in gibberish. Cut back to Katara's p.o.v, looking at Momo's face.

Katara: Got it?

(Momo grabs the water skin and flies off. Cut to Aang huffing and puffing as he runs at breakneck speed up the steps on the herbalist institute. He reaches the top and runs into a circular wooden building. Cut to the inside of the building which is filled with trees, bushes and flowers. An old woman is in the background and a white fluffy cat is in the foreground. Aang runs into the frame and cat meows and jumps out of the way.)

Aang (speaking very fast): Hello! I'm sorry to barge in like this, but I need some medicine for my friends. They have fevers and they've been coughing and –
Herbalist (mixing something in a bowl on the table in front of her): Settle down, young man. Your friends are going to be fine. (She walks over to another table where the cat is sitting.) I've been up here for over forty years you know, used to be others, but they all left years ago. (She pets the cat who begins to purr.) Now it's just me and Miyuki.
Aang: That's nice.
Herbalist: Wounded Earth Kingdom troops still come by now and again, brave boys, and thanks to my remedies they always leave in better shape they when they arrive.
Aang: That's nice. Are you almost done?
Herbalist: Hold on, I just need to add one last ingredient. (Walking amongst the shrubbery, looking around and muttering to herself) Oh, sandalwood... oh, er, uh, that won't do, banana leaf? Ah, nope, uh, ginger root, uh uh, oh where is that pesky little plant?

(Aang looks exasperated in the background. Cut to Zuko's ship steaming by the shore, the sunset in its last stages in the background. Cut to Zuko practicing firebending on the foredeck in the background. Iroh's arm comes into the frame.)

Iroh: Is everything okay? It's been almost an hour and you haven't given the men an order.
Zuko: I don't care what they do. (Looks away out to sea.)
Iroh: Don't give up hope yet. You can still find the Avatar before Zhao.
Zuko (turning back, desperation and fear on his face): How, Uncle? With Zhao's resources it's just a matter of time before he captures the Avatar. (Turns back out to sea and whispers) My honor, my throne, my country, I'm about to lose them all.

(Cut back to an exterior shot of the herbalist institute, then a shot of the old woman from the p.o.v. of some bushes she is looking at.)

Herbalist: Here's what I was looking for! Plum blossom!

(She grabs one, then cut to Aang, his head on the table were Miyuki sits. He gets up.)

Aang: Finally!

(Cut to Aang grabbing the bowl from the woman's hands, then zoom backwards to show Aang and the Herbalist.)

Aang: Thanks for all your help!
Herbalist (hitting Aang on the wrist and knocking loose his grip on the bowl): Hands off! What do you think you're doing?
Aang (looking frightened and abashed): Taking the cure to my friends!
Herbalist: Ahaha! This isn't a cure, it's Miyuki's dinner.

(The Herbalist places the bowl on the table in front of Miyuki. She pets the cat who begins to eat and purr.)

Herbalist: Plum blossom is her favorite.
Aang: What about my friends?
Herbalist: Well, all they need is some frozen wood frogs. There's plenty of them down in the valley swamp.
Aang: What am I supposed to do with frozen frogs?
Herbalist: Why, suck on them of course!
Aang (shocked): Suck on them!?
Herbalist: The frog's skin excretes a substance that'll cure your friends, but make sure you get plenty. Once those little critters thaw out, they're useless!

(Cut to a wide shot of the two and space that separates them. A few moments pass in silence.)

Aang: You're insane aren't you?
Herbalist: Thaaat's right. (She turns back to her work, then turns back to Aang.) Well, don't stand there all day. (She whips her spoon at Aang, who ends up with a bunch of black gunk on his face.) Go!

(Cut to Aang running out of the building, wiping his face. Suddenly arrows fly through the air at him. Two land to his immediate right and left. As Aang looks around, cut to a wide shot of the field Aang stands in. Above, a huge number of arrows arch toward him at a reduced frame rate. Cut back to an overhead shot of Aang as the arrows enter the shot from the sides of the screen. Aang airbends a shell of wind around him knocking all the arrows aside. Aang pulls one of the arrows out of the ground and offers it to someone o.c.)

Aang: Uhh, I think you dropped this.

(Cut to a panning shot of the Yu Yan archers in the surrounding trees, then a cut back to Aang's frightened face. Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(When the show returns, Aang is struggling to pull an arrow out of the ground that is holding his foot in place. He releases it just in time as the archers fire another volley. He runs out of the way as two groups of four arrows each plow into the ground near him as he runs o.c. He runs towards the gate he entered through, but it is blocked by archers. They fire, but he dodges and runs in the opposite direction. Dodging hails of arrows, he jumps off the cliff at the back of the institute. Cut to Aang hurtling down the cliff. Up above, the archers jump off the cliff after him. Cut to side view of Aang falling with the cliff face on his left. He lets his hood billow a bit to slow him down until he hits the tree canopy beneath. Aang's face gets beaten repeatedly by the brush rapidly flying by. Cut to the archers who fire in mid flight, sending anchor ropes into the nearby trees as they fall so they can swing tarzan-like after Aang. Several shots are shown in quick succession as Aang is pursued from tree branch to tree branch by the archers. Eventually Aang comes out of the forest in the swamp. He lands in the water and emerges with a white, frozen frog.)

Aang: A frog!

(The frog is knocked out of his hand by an arrow. He stands up and tries to run through the water, looking for frogs along the way. Arrows fall all around. He gets to a log rising out of the water, and an arrow pins his right arm to it. It is soon joined by several more. The archers fire another volley, but Aang waterbends a wall of ice in front of him. The arrows shatter the ice. They fire another volley, pinning his left arm, followed by a net that covers his upper body. Close of Aang's face in terror. Fade to a close up of Aang's upper body, his arms stretched out, his face downcast. The room is dark, but there is fire in the room that sheds some illumination. Aang's raised eyes of defiance as the screen fades to a wider shot. Aang is a prisoner in a large room with two stone pillars that have fires on their crests. Aang is shackled to them from his arms. Fade to a shot of the guards outside his room, then fade and zoom out to show exterior shots of the fortress in which he is being held. It looks impregnable. Rank upon rank of walls, gates and towers. Cut back to the prison chamber, where Aang struggles against his bonds. The door opens and Aang looks up. Cut to a view from the doorway. Zhao walks into the room towards Aang, hands behind his back.)

Zhao: So this is the great Avatar? Master of all the elements. I don't know how you've managed to elude the Fire Nation for a hundred years, but your little game of hide and seek is over.
Aang: I've never hidden from you. Untie me and I'll fight you right now!
Zhao: Uhh, no. Tell me, how does it feel to be the only airbender left? (Putting his face up to Aang's.) Do you miss your people? (Aang's look of defiance melts and he drops his head.) Oh, don't worry, you won't be killed like they were. (Aang looks up again in anger.) See, if you die you'll just be reborn and the Fire Nation will have to being its search for the Avatar all over again. So, I'll keep you alive – but just barely.

(Zhao turns to leave, still smirking. Aang blows a gale force wind, knocking Zhao until into the wall where he collapses in a heap. He shakes his head to clear his vision and stands up.)

Zhao: Blow all the wind you want! Your situation is futile. There is no escaping this fortress – and no one is coming to rescue you.

(Exit Zhao, the door slamming behind him. Cut to Katara and Sokka snuggled up in their sleeping bags which lie between Appa's feet. Sokka has a coughing fit.)

Sokka: Water...
Katara: Momo should be back any minute.

(Momo jumps into the shot, chittering happily. He jumps up close to Katara. He drops a dead mouse on to her chest. She looks at it in disgust.)

Katara: Ugh! No, Momo, water. Wa-ter! (Momo's ear go straight u. He then jumps off her and scampers o.c.) Aang, what in the world is taking you so long?

(Cut to an overhead shot of Aang still bound between the pillars, then cut to several exterior night shots of the fortress, culminating in a long shot of the figure in the blue mask. The camera zooms in three step changes to a close up of the blue masked face which then moves left o.c. Cut to a view of the road leading to the fortress where a wagon is making its way toward the gate. Cut to a view of the undercarriage of the wagon as it passes. The Blue Spirit is holding on to the underside of the wagon. The wagon reaches the gate.)

Guard: All clear.

(A gate guard looks at the wagon and walks around it. When the guard checks the undercarriage, the Blue Spirit is gone. The guard gets back up. Cut to a wider shot of the wagon and the guards around it.)

Guard: All clear. Go on in.

(Shift to a view from inside the wagon where the Blue Spirit has hidden himself, then cut to an overhead shot of the wagon as it enters the first of the fortress' three gates. The shot pans up to rest on the massive central tower where Aang is held prisoner. Cut to a view of the first courtyard where the boxes in the wagon have been unloaded. The Blue Spirit runs from them and ducks into the shadows. Cut to a shot of an ornate balcony with bonfire pots on either side. The balcony is festooned with gold and red spades. Admiral Zhao appears in ceremonial dress flanked by attendants. During his speech the view cuts to show the innermost courtyard full of fire nation soldiers standing at attention.)

Zhao: We are the sons and daughters of fire! The superior element! Until today, only one thing stood in our path to victory. The Avatar! I am here to tell you that he is now my prisoner! (The soldier's cheer three times.) This is the year Sozen's comet returns to grant us its power! (Another cheer is heard.) This is the year the Fire Nation breaks through the walls of Ba-Sing-Se and burns the city to the ground!

(As Zhao speaks, various shots are seen of the Blue Spirit steadily and stealthily infiltrating the fortress. Cut back to Aang, still struggling fruitlessly against his chains. He finally stops, breathing heavily. Suddenly, frogs start leaping out of his shirt and hood.)

Aang: What? No! Don't leave frogs! My friends are sick and they need you! Please go back to being frozen!

(He begins to struggle again as the frogs hop away towards the door. Cut to the four guards standing outside the chamber. They begin to look confused when they frog noises. They look down to see a few frogs coming from underneath the door. Suddenly they look up as a Fire Nation soldier's helmet comes bouncing down the corridor towards them. One of the guard walks up the corridor and turns right at the first junction, disappearing from view. A gout of flame erupts from the cross hallway as well as the sound of a brief scuffle. Two more guards go up to the junction and turn right, firebending stances at the ready. Cut to a view looking down the cross hallway. The first guard who went is hanging from the ceiling, tied up. Shift to the hanging soldier's p.o.v. and pan up to reveal the Blue Spirit on the ceiling above the two new combatants. He drops down and melee begins, but it is over quickly. Cut back last guards p.o.v. where he now sees the Blue Spirit at the junction. Cut to a view of the door to Aang's chamber. The lone guard grabs the alarm horn next to him, but a knife throw from o.c. knocks it out of his hand. The guard lets loose a gout of flame at the Blue Spirit as he runs down the hall toward the door, but the intruder extinguishes the blast with a bucket of water. The masked figure then sweeps the guards feet out from under him with the empty bucket. Cut to Aang still struggling inside the chamber. He stops and looks at the noises of violence coming from through door. These stop abruptly and replaced by the sound of the lock turning in the door. The door opens and the Blue Spirit enters. He brandishes two curved swords and runs forward to Aang, who screams in fear. Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(When the show returns, we see a zooming close up of the prison keep in the center of the fortress. Cut to Aang, still screaming. The Blue Spirit approaches and two sword cuts are heard. Aang pulls his arms back in surprise – the Blue Spirit has freed him. He looks at his liberator in wonder. The Blue Spirit comes closer and cuts his remaining bonds, turns and walks back toward the door.)

Aang: Who are you? What's going on? Are you here to rescue me? (The Blue Spirit opens the door and motions for him to follow.) I'll take that as a "yes."

(Aang follows him out past the gagged and tied guard at the door to his chamber. He hears frog noises and turns to see his frogs on the floor.)

Aang: My frogs! Come back! And stop thawing out! (The Blue Spirit comes back, picks him up by the collar and carries him out. He continues from o.c.) Wait! My friends need to suck on those frogs!

(Meanwhile, back at the run-down temple, Momo has succeeded in piling up mountains of junk around Katara, but no water. Momo returns again with another trinket.)

Katara (with a weak, sickly voice): How many times do I have to tell you, Momo, we need water. Wa-ter. Oh forget it. Aang, please, hurry.
Sokka (delirious): Who's this "Aang" kid you keep talking about, Your Highness?

(Cut back to an obviously annoyed Katara, her right eyebrow twitching. Scene shifts back to a few exterior shots of the fortress, then to Aang and the Blue Spirit walking silently in the sewer system underneath the fortress. Soldiers walk back and forth above them. They hope out of a grate and into one of the courtyards. Cut to Zhao walking in one of the torch-lit corridors of the fortress, followed by some sort of scribe.)

Zhao: I want a full transcription of my speech sent to the Fire Lord, along with glowing testimonials from all of the ranking officers present, and –

(He cuts himself off as he hears moans. Cut to Zhao's right, where the soldiers that the Blue Spirit tied still lie. Zhao, upset, slams open the door to Aang's prison cell. It is empty, except for a frog which "ribbits" at him from the floor. Zhao turns in anger and leaves, the scribe in tow.)

Scribe: Sir, should I hold off sending that speech to the Fire Lord?

(Cut back to the two would-be escapees who are now scaling a rope on the innermost wall of the fortress. They are spotted and the view zooms out as one of the guards shouts.)

Soldier: There, on the wall!

(A soldier appears at the top of the wall they are climbing. He cuts the rope and the pair fall down the wall, Aang screaming. Cut to side view where Aang airbends them to a soft landing. When the dust clears, the Blue Spirit unsheathes his swords and they run. Cut to Zhao on the ornate balcony.)

Zhao (shouting): The Avatar has escaped! Close all the gates immediately!

(Cut to the escapees running, Aang passes the Blue Spirit.)

Aang: Stay close to me!

(The third gate is closing in front of them, as are the two beyond it, and it is blocked by many soldiers. Aang airbends a blast of air that blows them out of the way. Aang makes the gate, but the Blue Spirit gets involved in melee and has to stop. Aang turns to see his liberator in trouble. He grabs a spear from a guard near him, airbends him out of the way, breaks the head off the spear and launches back into battle to save his new friend. The gate closes behind him. The Blue Spirit is surrounded, but Aang airbends them all out of the way. With a mighty effort he then catapults his liberator to the top of the third wall. He is instantly surrounded, but Aang appears using his staff as a helicopter blade. He plucks the Blue Spirit off the wall and heads into the next courtyard. Cut to a close up of Aang struggling to keep them aloft. The Blue Spirit uses his swords to knock the spears sent up at them by the guards. They barely next the top of the next wall as they crash unceremoniously onto the battlement. Aang's staff goes spinning away as guards instantly rush them. Aang runs for his staff, but a guard stops him, taking several swings at Aang with his sword. The Blue Spirit throws the guard over the wall. Aang then airbends the other guards off the wall. Cut to a wide shot of the second wall, where more soldiers are brings scaling ladders. Aang the Blue Spirit knock off the soldiers as they reach the top. With two mighty blasts, Aang depopulates the two scaling ladders nearest him as the Blue Spirit knocks the one final soldier off his. Aang brings over his two scaling ladders and steps onto the one his liberator has just emptied. He hands one ladder to the masked man.)

Aang: Here, take this. Jump on my back!

(The Blue Spirit complies and Aang begins to use the ladders as massive stilts, shedding one each time a step is taken. Cut to a wide shot of the second courtyard where dawn is approaching in the background. The first ladder shed still had some Fire Nation soldiers on it, but it falls in the dust.)

Aang: Gimme the next one!

(The Blue Spirit again complies. Cut to the bottom of their final stilt where a Fire Nation soldier sends a gout of flame up the ladder. It is too late though, as Aang and the masked man jump from the last stilt and just manage to grab the edge of the final wall. They are unable to hold on, however, and fall to the ground. The Blue Spirit draws his swords. Four firebenders unleash their flame on them, but Aang puts the masked man behind him and airbends the flames away.)

Zhao (initially from o.c.): Hold your fire! (Cut to Zhao) the Avatar must be captured alive!

(The Blue Spirit instantly comes up behind Aang and crosses his swords in front of Aang's throat. Cut to a view behind the escapees that pans right slowly, accenting the stand off, then cut to the implacable blue mask of the intruder. Cut back to a close of Zhao's eyes.)

Zhao (through gritted teeth): Open the gate.
Officer: Admiral, what are you doing?
Zhao: Let them out, now!

(The gate is opened and the Blue Spirit backs out with his captives, swords still at his throat. Cut back to Zhao, the officer questioning him still visible over his left shoulder.)

Officer: How could you let them go?
Zhao: A situation like this requires... precision.

(The Blue Spirit continues backing away from the fortress. Zhao now looks on from the top of the main gate. Cut to an arrow being strung on a bow by an unseen soldier, then cut back to Zhao, who looks to his right as he speaks.)

Zhao: Do you have a clear shot?

(Cut to a Yu Yan archer, who doesn't respond, but lowers his head in preparation for his shot.)

Zhao: Knock out the thief. I'll deliver him to the Fire Lord along with the Avatar.

(The archer releases his arrow, which the camera follows across the field to its impact point on the Blue Spirits masks. Cut to a side view of Aang and the Blue Spirit as the masked man collapses backward in slow motion. Aang turns in horror, his eyes glazed. He recovers, turns around and airbends up a huge cloud of dust around him and the Blue Spirit. Cut to Zhao.)

Zhao: Quick! Recover the Avatar!

(Cut to the main gate opening and a crowd Fire Nation soldiers emerging and running towards the dust cloud. Cut to inside the dust cloud, where Aang removes the Blue Spirit's mask to reveal Prince Zuko. Aang starts back in horror, he falls backward on the ground. He jumps up and runs away, but then turns to look at Zuko, his eyes huge and full of compassion. He sees the Fire Nation shoulders getting close through the smoke. Still, he hesitates. When the dust clears, however, the soldiers find nothing. The crossroad where Zuko had fallen is now empty. Cut back to Zhao looking insanely angry. A frog hops up onto the railing, “ribbits”, and hops off. Fade to white, then a blurry shot of a forest looking straight up into the canopy overhead. It is morning. The screen pans down to Aang sitting on a nearby root, the view is still blurry. He looks forlorn. Cut to Zuko, whose view we were clearly just seeing. He looks a bit dazed still.)

Aang (from o.c. at first): You know what the worst part about being born over a hundred years ago is? I miss all the friends I used to hang out with. Before the war started (cut to Aang still looking down at the ground), I used to always my friend Kuzon. The two of us, we'd get in and out of so much trouble together. He was one of the best friends I ever had (he turns to face Zuko) – and he was from the Fire Nation, just like you. (Cut back to Zuko still looking at Aang.) If we knew each other back then (cut back to Aang), do you think we could have been friends too?

(Cut to a wide shot of Zuko lying on a bank of earth, Aang next to him, perched a large tree root. After a pause, Zuko lets loose a huge gout of flame at him, but Aang dodges and flies away on a current of air. Zuko watches him hop away from tree branch to tree branch and out sight. Cut to Zuko as the camera slowly zooms backward. Fade to a close up of the swamp, where Aang is collecting frozen frogs once again. Cut back to a wide shot of Zuko's ship reeling in the cutter vessel back into the mother ship. Shift to Zuko, sullen, walking past his Uncle on the main deck. He has been practicing with the sumki horn he bought in "The Waterbending Scroll.")

Iroh: Where have you been, Prince Zuko? You missed music night! Lieutenant Jee sang a stirring love song.
Zuko (walking away): I'm going to bed. No disturbances.

(Iroh rubs his head and begins to blow his horn again, echoing the same sad dirge that has been playing for much of the episode. Fade back to the run down temple. Aang returns, downcast. He puts frogs in his friends' mouths.)

Aang: Suck on these. They'll make you feel better.

(Aang collapse backwards onto Appa's beaver like tail with a sigh. Cut to Sokka with a frog in his mouth.)

Sokka (speech impaired by the amphibian oral obstruction): Aang, how was your trip? Did you make any new friends?
Aang: No, I don't think I did.

(Aang rolls over. Fade to Prince Zuko lying awake in his own chamber, lost in thought. He looks at the Fire Nation symbol hanging on his wall, then rolls over himself. Cut back to the temple and then to Sokka, a happy expression on his, still sucking on the frog in his mouth.)

Sokka: Mmmm! This is tasty! Mmm!

(It thaws out and begins moving around and croaking. Sokka realize what it is and spits it out in disgust. Cut to Katara, her frog has also thawed. She cries out and it hops out of her mouth. Both Katara and Sokka begin spitting and coughing. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Scene opens with a lake view. Camera pans up to reveal Sokka, Aang, Katara and Momo sitting around a camp on the lakeshore. A large blue tent occupies the left hand portion of the screen. When the camera stops a large green fish jumps into view and falls back into the lake. Katara gets up and points at it.)

Katara: Look!

(Sokka gets up and assumes a gunslinger stance. Cut to a close up of Sokka's face, with Katara visible over his right shoulder. Cut to another fish in mid-air, it drops back off the screen in slow motion. It appears to be some sort of green catfish. Cut to Sokka and Katara again.)

Sokka: He is taunting us. (Cut to long shot of the group.) You are so gonna be dinner! (Sokka runs back to the tent and grabs his fishing pole which standing up outside of it, runs back to the lake edge and casts the pole a few times without effect.) Hey! Where's the fishing line?
Aang: Oh, I didn't think you would need it, Sokka. (Holds up a necklace.)
Sokka: Aahh, it's all tangled!
Aang: Not tangled – woven. (Airbending himself to a standing position and turning to Katara.) I made you a necklace, Katara. (Looking from side to side in an embarrassed fashion) I thought since you lost your other one...

(Aang holds up the necklace and sheepish smile marked by a sound effect spreads across his face, cut to Katara.)

Katara (smiles, walks over to Aang and takes necklace): Thanks, Aang. I love it.
Sokka (again at the water's edge and looking back at Aang): Great, Aang. Maybe instead of saving the world you can go into the jewelry making business.
Aang: I don't see why I can't do both. (Katara puts necklace on in the background.)

(Sokka turns his back to the camera to see the fish leaping again from the lake. He throws his pole like a spear and it disappears into the water.)

Sokka: Stop taunting me!

(A visual effect denoting anger flashes briefly near Sokka's head as he says this. He draws his knife from behind his back and enters the water in a bandy-legged way. He lunges into the water with the knife trying to catch the fish. Aang appears in the foreground, watching Sokka's antics.)

Katara (from o.c.): So, how do I look?

(Aang turns to face Katara as she begins to speak. By the end of her question Aang's eyes have almost popped out of his skull. He is dumfounded. Cut to a view of Katara's lower body with the camera immediately beginning to pan up. Around Katara, the world has become beautiful, with the rocks and trees bathed in a romantic dark pink or purple hue, every object reflecting light as if studded with diamonds. The music has changed abruptly to reflect Aang's feelings for Katara. The pan ends with a view of Katara's upper body, her hand at her new necklace and small patches of red under her eyes, indicated some embarrassment. Cut to Aang, who is using his left forefinger to loosen his collar while staring at Katara.)

Aang: You mean all of you or just your neck? I mean, uh, both look great.
Sokka (who has just emerged from the lake, holding a fish as if about to give it a kiss): Smoochie, smoochie, someone's in love. (The fish flips is his hands, knocking him back into the lake.)
Aang (rubbing his head in an embarrassed gesture): I...well...
Katara (looking in annoyance o.c. towards her brother): Stop teasing him, Sokka. (Momo hops up onto Aang's shoulder.) Aang's just a good friend. (She rubs Aang's head) A sweet little guy – just like Momo. (She rubs Momo's head just as she had Aang's a moment before.)
Aang (clearly put down): Thanks.

(Sokka approaches them, sopping wet, empty handed and with a dark look on his face. An ominous noise off screen prompts Momo to fly toward it and off screen. Cut to a large rock that Momo is sitting on, looking off screen. He is joined a moment later by Aang who has clearly airbent himself into the air and onto the rock. He points towards the source of the noise.)

Aang: Someone's being attacked by a platypus bear!

(Cut to see a huge bear like creature with red eyes and the bill of a platypus. It bares its teeth and rears itself up on its hind legs. Cut to a view from right behind the bear's left shoulder. The bear is threatening a man in blue who smiles calmly at the advancing monster. Cut to long shot of the bear as it advances, swinging at the man, who dodges the blows by causally stepping backwards, hands behind his back. Cut to a view from behind the man's right shoulder. The bears swings a few more time while Aang jumps up onto a rock behind the bear. Cut to the a frontal shot of the man, a smile still plastered on his face.)

Calm Man (to Aang): Well, hello there. (Bears swings at him from o.c., the man dodges.) Nice day, isn't it?
Aang: Make noise, it'll run off!

(Screen expands and pans right as Sokka and Katara run up behind Aang.)

Sokka: No, play dead, he'll lose interest!

(Cut to wide shot of bear and calm man. The bears swings and misses again.)

Calm Man: Whoa! Close one. Haha!
Katara: Run down hill, then climb a tree!
Sokka: No, punch him in the bill!
Aang: And then run in zigzags!
Calm Man: No need. It's going to be fine.

(The bear swings again, swiping a large chunk of wood out of a nearby tree as the calm man ducks just in time. Aang shoots into the air from off his nearby rock up over the head of the bear. He lands, putting himself between the calm man and the bear, and airbends up a wall of air that momentarily pushes the beast backwards.)

Aang: Whoa there!

(The bears rears up and roars, only to have Appa rear up behind him and roar. Cut to a side shot of the bear with Appa behind him. The bear drops an egg out his behind and runs into the river and swims away. Cut to Sokka's arms picking up the large egg.)

Sokka: Mmm! Lunch! (He sniffs egg, then looks at calm man o.c. with a haughty look.) Lucky for you we came along.
Calm Man: Thanks, but everything was already under control. Not to worry, Aunt Wu predicted I'd have a safe journey. (He puts his hands in a position of prayer and bows slightly at this.)
Aang: Aunt who?
Calm Man: No, Aunt Wu. She's the fortuneteller from my village. Awful nice knowing your future.
Katara: Wow, it must be. That explains why you were so calm.
Sokka: But the fortuneteller was wrong! You didn't have a safe journey, you were almost killed!
Calm Man: But I wasn't. All right, have a good one! (He gestures in farewell and begins to walk away, but turns back again.) Oh, and Aunt Wu said if I met any travelers to give them this. (He hands Aang a long, thin wrapped object and walks away.)
Katara: Maybe we should go see Aunt Wu and learn our fortunes. It could be fun.
Sokka: Oh come on, fortunetelling is nonsense.

(While Sokka is speaking, Aang shreds the objects wrapping to reveal an umbrella. When Sokka finishes speaking, the umbrella opens in Aang's hand.)

Aang: What do ya know, an umbrella!

(The sky darkens instantly and thunder is heard as it begins to pour rain. Katara smiles and waterbends the rain in a sparkling arc away from her head.)

Katara: That proves it. (She runs under the umbrella with Aang.)
Sokka (holding the egg above his head to try and deflect the rain): No it doesn't – you can't really tell the future.
Katara: I guess you're not really getting wet then.

(The egg slips out of Sokka's hands and in his attempts to grab it again it flies up into the air and lands back on his head. Cut to the three walking down a road. It is still pouring rain. Aang and Katara are under the umbrella. Sokka is getting soaked.)

Sokka: Of course she predicted it was gonna rain. The sky's been gray all day.
Katara: Just admit you might be wrong and you can come under the umbrella.
Sokka: Look, I'm going to predict the future now (making funny motions and in an exaggerated voice) – “It's going to keep drizzling.” (He folds his arms across his chest and assumes an expression of defiance.) See!

(The rain instantly stops and the sun comes out.)

Aang: Not everyone has the gift, Sokka.

(Cut to side view of the group walking with Appa bringing up the rear. As Appa passes Sokka he shakes off his wet fur, drenching Sokka once again.)

Sokka (as he gets soaked): Yahhh!

(Cut to a view of a single snow capped mountain, its peak partially obscured in clouds. Camera pans down to reveal a village and its main gate. They walk through the gate and come to the village square. In front of the circular door of one of the buildings, some sort of herald dressed in black greets them.)

Herald: Aunt Wu is expecting you.
Katara: Really?

(The three walk forward as Sokka makes a sound of disgust. Cut to the three in a room with three sitting pillows and an open door to the left. They have passes through the circular door mentioned above and which is now on the right side of the screen. The herald closes this door behind them as they walk in. A young girl in a pink kimono and huge hair braids that stick straight out from the sides of her head enters from the opening on the left.)

Meng: My name is Meng and I'm Aunt Wu's assistant.

(Her eyes go wide. Cut to a view of Aang's lower body that pans upwards to his face and upper body. The music and background parallel Aang's romanticized view of Katara seen earlier. The effect is somewhat spoiled, however, by Aang's unenthusiastic facial expression and slightly hunched over posture.)

Meng (to Aang): Well hello there.
Aang (rubbing his nose): Hello.
Meng (as Aang and Katara sit on the pillows): Can I get you some tea, or some of Aunt Wu's special bean curd puffs?
Sokka: I'll try a curd puff.
Meng (giving Sokka the heisman): Just a second. (Bending down to address Aang) So what's your name?
Aang: Aang.
Meng: That rhymes with Meng! And you've got some pretty big ears, don't you?
Aang (confused): I... guess...
Sokka: Oh, don't be modest. They're huge!

(Sokka spreads his arms wide to demonstrate just how huge they are, as Aang looks angrily at Sokka. He puts his hands over his ears as if to smash them down to an acceptable size.)

Meng: Well Aang, it is very nice to meet you. Very nice.
Aang: Likewise.

(Meng exits, looking back slyly out of the corner of her eye, presumably at Aang. Cut to shot of the three seated on the pillows.)

Sokka: I can't believe we're here in the house of nonsense.
Katara: Try to keep an open mind, Sokka. There are things in this world that just can't be explained. Wouldn't it be nice to have some insight into your future?
Sokka: It would be nice to have some bean curd puffs.

(Katara looks annoyed at this. Cut to overhead shot of the hallway adjacent to the reception room the three are sitting in. The hallway shows another door leading farther into the building. From the right, Meng appears with a tray of refreshments. A moment later the inner door opens to reveal a young woman in a green kimono. She rushes over to Meng.)

Woman in Green: Oh Meng! Aunt Wu says I'm going to meet my true love! He's going to give me a rare panda lilly.
Meng (with Aang visible over her right shoulder): That's so romantic. (Looks dreamily over at Aang) I wonder if my true love will give me a rare flower.
Aang (earnestly): Good luck with that!
Woman in Green (amused): Is that the big eared guy who Aunt Wu predicted you'd marry?

(Meng shoves the young woman o.c. and brings the tray over to the three, but her eyes are fixed on Aang. She trips and almost dumps the food on Aang, but he helps steady her grip on the tray. His hands now hold hers as they together hold the tray. They share a moment looking into each other's eyes.)

Meng (embarrassed): Enjoy your snack. (She exits with a short fairy dust sound effect.)
Aunt Wu (from o.c. at first): Welcome young travelers. (Cut to torso shot of Aunt Wu in a yellow or gold kimono looking serene.) Now, who's next? Don't be shy.

(Both boys look uninterested. Screen pans left to Katara.)

Katara: I guess that's me.

(Katara runs o.c. to follow Aunt Wu. Cut to Aang and Sokka, the latter of which is chomping on curd puffs.)

Sokka: Not bad. Not bad. Mmmm! (Offers puffs to Aang.)
Aang (pushing puffs away): I'm good on puffs. So...what do you think they're talking about back there?
Sokka: Boring stuff, I'm sure. Love. Who she's going to marry. How many babies she's gonna have.
Aang (growing more alarmed at each of Sokka's pronouncements): Yeh... dumb stuff like that... (bites his fingernails, eyes wide) well, I've gotta find a bathroom!

(Aang runs o.c. as Sokka stretches out over the pillows and eats another puff. Momo grabs the bowl of puffs and runs off. Cut to Aang walking down the hall near the inner door, obviously trying to be quiet so he can eavesdrop. All between Katara and Aunt Wu from o.c., camera on Aang.)

Aunt Wu: Your palms are so smooth – do you use moisturizer?
Katara: Actually, I have this special seaweed lotion. I could get you some if you want. (Aang sticks his tongue out, his face clearly expressing his disdain for discussions around moisturizer) So, do you see anything interesting in my love line? (Aang's eyes bug out instantly and he leans in close to hear.)
Aunt Wu: I feel great romance for you. The man you're going to marry...
Katara: Tell me more!
Aunt Wu: I can see that he is a very powerful bender.

(The sound of an egg timer going off is heard, and Aang's expression flips from wide eyed to smug in an instant. Happy music plays. Cut to long shot of him in the hallway as he launches himself into the air, ecstatic over this news. Clearly there is no doubt in his mind as to what this prediction means. Cut to Sokka picking his teeth. Aang walks back into the reception room looking like the cat who ate the canary.)

Sokka: Looks like someone had a pretty good bathroom break.
Aang: Yeh, when I was in there...
Sokka: I don't even wanna know!

(Aunt Wu and Katara enter.)

Aunt Wu: Who's next?
Sokka (standing): Okay, let's get this over with.
Aunt Wu (looking unhappily at Sokka): Your future is full of struggle and anguish, most of it self-inflicted.
Sokka: But, you didn't read my palms or anything!
Aunt Wu: I don't need to – it's written all over your face. (Cut to Sokka, who looks displeased. To Aang) You then, come with me.

(Aang follows her out, Sokka sits down and pouts. Cut to Aang and Aunt Wu entering her inner chamber. It is a simple room with the four red pillars rising to the roof. The square made by the pillars is depressed into the floor by a small amount so that you have to step down into the area where Aunt Wu and the guests sit and discuss the future. In the center of the square is a small fire. Four pillows lie at the four corners of the square. On the left is a small urn filled to the brim with bones. Aunt Wu and Aang go over to the urn.)

Aunt Wu: This is the most reliable method of telling your fortune. The bones never lie. (Motioning to the urn with bones.) Go on, pick one. (Aang picks one and they sit down.) Now throw it on the fire. (He obeys.) The heat makes cracks in the bones and I read the bone cracks to tell your destiny.

(Cut to a view of the fire. The camera zooms in on the bones. A huge crack appears and the music turns threatening.)

Aang: Wow, that's a big crack. (The bone cracks again, almost disintegrating.)
Aunt Wu (surprised): I've never seen this before. (Bone explodes, sending flame to the ceiling.) Oh my!

(Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(When the show returns, the camera focuses on the fire, bits of bone surrounding it. Cut to Aunt Wu, as dramatic music plays in the background, signaling the importance of what has transpired.)

Aunt Wu: This is incredible! You will be involved in a great battle; an awesome conflict between the forces of good and evil, a battle whose outcome will determine the fate of the whole world!
Aang (dramatic music and the sound of fire suddenly dies away): Yeh, yeh, I knew that already, but did it say anything about a girl?
Aunt Wu (confused): A girl? You want to know about love?
Aang: Yes!
Aunt Wu: I'm sorry, but I didn't see anything. (Aang looks downcast at this, and Aunt Wu looks on compassionately.) Oh look! (She slaps the side of her face with her hand, in a gesture of mea culpa) I must have missed something. (She picks up a sliver of bone, holds it over her head and examines its underside) Right here – it says, “trust your heart and you will be with the one you love.”
Aang: Really!? (He stands and clasps his hands in a gesture of thanks) Thank you, Aunt Wu!

(Aang runs out, happy. Aunt Wu shakes her head at the exiting airbender. Cut to exterior of Aunt Wu's building. Aang has just exited and the door closes quickly behind him. Appa, Katara and Sokka await him, and once together they all move further into the main square together. Appa's massive footsteps echo through the ensuing conversation.)

Sokka: Well, now you got to see for yourselves that fortunetelling is just a big, stupid hoax.
Katara: You're just saying that because you're going to make yourself unhappy your whole life.
Sokka (exploding): That woman is crazy! My life will be calm, and happy and joyful!

(Sokka gets more upset with each of his successive pronouncements. He ends by kicking a small stone off the ground which ricochets off a nearby sign and hits him the head, knocking him on his behind.)

Sokka: Ow! (From o.c.) That doesn't prove anything!
Katara (cut to Katara and Aang): Well, I liked my predictions. Certain things are going to turn out very well. (She holds her hands together in a gesture of hope.)
Aang (knowingly): They sure are.
Katara: Why, what did she tell you?
Aang (smiling): Some stuff. You'll find out.

(Cut to overhead shot of the village square. A large crowd has gathered at its center where a covered stage resides. Aang and his friends approach the crowd from the rear. Cut a view of the rear of the crowd as Aang et al enter. Most of the people standing around are looking up in silence. The Calm Man from before is one of these onlookers.)

Katara (also looking up): What's with the sky?
Calm Man: We are waiting for Aunt Wu to come and read the clouds to predict the fate of the whole village. (Camera pans left to Aang.)
Aang (pointing up): That cloud looks like a fluffy bunny.
Calm Man (shot widens to show more of the crowd): You better hope that's not a bunny – the fluffy bunny cloud forecasts doom and destruction.
Sokka: Do you even hear yourself?

(Calm Man looks annoyed at Sokka. Cut to another crowd member in front of the group.)

Woman: The cloud reading will tell us if Mount Makapu will remain dormant for another year or if it will erupt.
Calmn Man: We used to have a tradition once a year of going up the mountain to check the volcano ourselves, but ever since Aunt Wu moved to the village twenty years ago we have a tradition of not doing that.
Sokka (incensed): I can't believe you would trust your lives to that crazy old woman's superstition.
Katara (putting a hand on Sokka's shoulder): Shhhh!! She's coming!

(Cut to shot between Katara and Sokka's heads which zooms to show an ever larger view of the approach of Aunt Wu and her herald. Cut to an overhead shot of the village square that shows the large staircase that Aunt Wu has just ascended. The crowd has parted to allow Aunt Wu access to the little stage. Cut to Aang and Katara, Aang with Momo perched on his head. The crowd begins to clap and cheer. Meng shows up suddenly next to Aang.

Meng (pointing to the sky and looking at Aang): Hey Aang, doesn't that cloud look like a flower?
Aang: Sure, I guess. (Camera pans left as Aang simultaneously pushes her off the screen.) Hey Katara, don't you think that cloud looks like a flower?
Katara: Shh!!

(Cut to Aunt Wu, now on the stage. She bows, draws breath and holds up her hands to the sky. Cut to a shot of an arrow shaped cloud. Cut to Aunt Wu examining an open book in her hands.)

Aunt Wu: Bending arrow cloud... good crops this year, nice big harvest! (Happy music plays)
Old Man: Arg! Good news! (Hugs old woman.)
Aunt Wu: Wavy moon shape cloud... let's see... gonna be a great year for twins.
Twins in Green (they give each other a high five): Yes!
Aunt Wu (dramatic music begins): And a cumulus cloud with a twisted nob coming off the end of it... the village will not be destroyed by the volcano this year!

(Crowd goes wild. Cut to Aang and Katara at the rear of the crowd, backs to the camera looking at Aunt Wu on the stage.)

Aang: Since I got you here, uh, there's something I want to tell you. I like you, but more than normal.

(Cut to front view of the two, where Katara is clearly paying no attention to Aang. She is looking with rapt attention at the stage with Aunt Wu o.c. and at this point she runs o.c. up towards the stage leaving Aang alone. Aang looks crushed. Momo, perched on Aang's head, also drops his ears in sadness.)

Aang: Never mind.

(Cut to a shot of Aunt Wu's house that pans slowly down. Cut to a view of Katara knocking on Aunt Wu's door. Cut to wider shot as Aunt Wu opens the door.)

Katara: Hi, Aunt Wu. Sorry to bother you.
Aunt Wu: Anytime.
Katara: About this man I'm supposed to marry (her cheeks flush momentarily in embarrassment)...is he gonna be handsome? (She clasps her hands together in a gesture of hope.) Oh, I hope he's tall!
Aunt Wu: Ahh, you want another reading.
Katara: Yes, please!

(She follows Aunt Wu into her reading room and the door closes behind them. Cut to a shot of the upper half of Sokka's head as he walks through the village square. He is clearly in a bad mood.)

Sokka: I can't believe all these saps. (Cut to side view where it is apparent that Aang follows behind him.) Someone really needs to scream some sense at them.
Aang: They seem happy, Sokka.
Sokka: Not for long. I'm gonna prove Aunt Wu's predictions are nonsense. (Turns and grabs nearby man.) Hey, you. I bet Aunt Wu told you to wear those red shoes, didn't she?
Red Shoed Man: Yeh, she said I'd be wearing red shoes when I met my true love.
Sokka: Uh-huh. And how many times have you worn those shoes since you got that fortune?
Red Shoed Man: Everyday.
Sokka (swirling red fire appears behind him, demonstrating his anger and frustration): THEN OF COURSE IT'S GOING TO COME TRUE!
Red Shoed Man: Really? You think so? I'm so excited!

(Sokka kicks a stone on the ground, it hits a duck o.c., which soon flys up onto Sokka's shoulders and starts to annoy him. He crawls away with the duck expressing its displeasure loudly. Cut to wide shot of Aunt Wu's reading room, where she and Katara are seated. The camera zooms in to them.)

Aunt Wu: ...and then you'll have your third great grandchild before quietly passing away in your sleep. Is that enough information for you?
Katara: Wow, thanks Aunt Wu. (Gets up, turns to leave, but turns back.) Oh, wait, one more thing. How warmly should I dress tomorrow?
Aunt Wu (flabbergasted): You want me to do a reading for that?

(Cut to Katara with a huge and slightly scary grin on her face – she nods enthusiastically. Cut to Sokka and Aang, with Sokka clearly out of his mind.)

Sokka: I don't care what Aunt Wu told you, you have to take a bath sometime!

(Cut to a filthy old man, who smiles, grunts his acknowledgement of Sokka's shouting, and turns and walks away in a Pig-Pen like cloud of dirt and dust.)

Aang: So, Sokka, you know some stuff about ladies, right?
Sokka (smugly): Some stuff? You've come to the right place. (Puts his arm around Aang's shoulders and points at his chest in a conspiratorial gesture.) What can I do you for?
Aang: Well, there's this girl...(cut to shot of Aang in the foreground, with Meng hiding behind a barrel at the far end of the square, stalking Aang. She laughs.)
Sokka: I think I know who you mean.
Aang: You do? And you're ok with it?
Sokka (clearly thinking of Meng rather than Katara): Of course I am. And, to tell you the truth, I've been picking up the subtle vibe that she likes you too. (Meng visible in the background, waving her arms trying to get Aang's attention.)
Aang: She does!?
Sokka: Oh yeh, she's crazy about ya. All ya have to do now is not mess it up.
Aang: Well, how do I do that?
Sokka: The number one mistake nice guys like you make: being too nice.
Aang (to a sound effect): You can be too nice?
Sokka: Yup. If you want to keep her interested you have to act aloof, like you don't really care one way or the other.
Aang (screen pans left to show Meng sidling up to Aang): Well...ok.
Meng: Hey Aang, I was wondering...
Aang: See ya later.

(Aang quickly walks away, leaving a disappointed Meng, who makes a sad noise.)

Sokka (rubbing his chin in admiration): Wow, that kid is good.

(Cut to the door of Aunt Wu's house. It is open and Aunt Wu is pushing Katara out into the square.)

Aunt Wu: ...and you'll be fine as long as you've got a scarf. Bye bye now.
Katara: Okay, okay, but, one more thing.
Aunt Wu (exasperated): All right, what is it?
Katara: Should I eat a mango or a papaya for breakfast tomorrow?
Aunt Wu: Papaya! (She slams the door shut.)
Katara: Ohhh, I hate papaya.

(She gives the dirt at her feet a petulant kick. The shot widens to show Aang leaning against the wall of Aunt Wu's house, trying to look nonchalant.)

Aang: Oh, hey Katara. I didn't see you there.
Katara (walking away): Hey Aang.
Aang (shouting after her): That's ok, I'm busy with my own stuff.

(Aang stands there for a moment looking abashed. A duck flys near him. They look at each other and the duck quacks at him. Cut to Katara at a papaya stand.)

Katara: Ugh. Papaya please.

(Cut to view from the papaya stand looking at Katara. The shopkeeper's hand enters the frame, handing Katara a fruit. Behind Katara, a woman in green and a man in white and pink are talking to each other in the square. The shot expands to reveal Aang entering from Katara's right.)

Aang (trying to sound cool): So...papaya.
Katara: Uh-huh. Would you like some?
Aang: You know me. (He picks up a fruit.) I don't really care what I eat.
Katara: Ok then. See you later.

(She turns and walks out of view while Aang takes a bite of the fruit. He chokes and spits it back up, clearly hating the taste.)

Aang: Maybe aloof isn't my style.

(In the background, the man in white and pink has just given something to the woman in green.)

Woman in Green: Oh! A panda lilly! (She and the man hug.)
Aang (to Momo, perched on his shoulder): Did you see that?

(Cut to a close of the panda lilly and the shot rapidly expands to show to couple hugging happily. The dreamy music is rudely interrupted as Aang appears in between the happy – physically forcing them apart. They are both surprised, and he leans over them to point at the flower the woman's hand.)

Aang: Excuse me. Where can a guy find one of those things?

(Cut to a view of a path leading towards the mountain. Then cut to a shot of Aang hopping up rocks on the side of the mountain.)

Sokka (from o.c.): I can't believe you're dragging me all the way up here for a stupid flower.
Aang: Not just any flower – a panda lilly. I've seen it in action and boy does it work.
Sokka (climbing into frame from below): Flowers are fine once you're married, but at this early stage it's critical that you maintain maximum aloofness.
Aang: But my heart is telling me to get this flower, and Aunt Wu said if I trusted my heart I would be with the one I love.
Sokka: What? Don't tell me you believe in that stuff too.
Aang: Well, Aunt Wu hasn't been wrong yet. Why should she be wrong about love? (Pointing up.) There, on the rim!

(Cut to shot of Aang on the rim of the volcano. The panda lilies dot the rim. A fiery glow emanates from the caldera below. He picks up a flower and sniffs it. His eyes pop open though when he looks down into the volcano. The caldera is full of lava.)

Aang: Oh no! Aunt Wu was wrong.

(He drops the flower into the lava. It burns instantly. Cut to break.)



Act III

(When the show returns, both Sokka and Aang are on the rim looking down in alarm.)

Sokka: Those people all think they're safe. We've got to warn'em.
Aang: There's no time to walk. (He opens up his glider.) Grab on. (He grabs Sokka and they launch into the air.)
Sokka: Aaahhh!

(The pair glide quickly down to the village and land in the square. Cut the two walking up to Katara, who is waiting outside of Aunt Wu's door.)

Aang: Hi, Katara.
Katara: Can you believe she won't let me in? And after all the business I've given her?
Aang: But, she doesn't even charge.
Katara: I know, but still.
Sokka: Well, we have other things to worry about. Aunt Wu was wrong about the volcano.
Katara: Sokka, you tried to convince me she was wrong before. It's going to take an awful lot to change my min –

(She is cut off by the sound of the mountain erupting to life. Cut to Katara and Aang looking up at the mountain, which suddenly has a full plume of ash and smoke stretching to the heavens.)

Katara: Oh, no!

(Cut to overhead shot of the square, showing the three surrounded by many villagers, including the Calm Man.)

Sokka: Everyone! That volcano is gonna blow any second. Aunt Wu was wrong!
Girl in Crowd: Yeh, yeh, we know you don't believe in Aunt Wu, “Mr. Science and Reason Lover.”
Katara: If you won't listen to him, maybe you'll listen to me. I want to believe Aunt Wu and her predictions as much as you do, but my brother and Aang saw the lava with their own eyes.
Calm Man: Well I heard Aunt Wu's prediction with my own ears.

(Aang airbends himself up onto the roof of Aunt Wu's house.)

Aang: Please listen to us! You are all in danger! And we have to get out of here. You can't rely on Aunt Wu's prediction. You have to take fate into your own hands.
Sokka (another explosion occurs): Look! (Pointing to the mountain.) Can your fortunetelling explain that?
Man in Crowd: Can your science explain why it rains?
Sokka (annoyed): Yes! Yes, it can!

(The crowd is not convinced. Cut to overhead shot showing the crowd dispersing back to their homes.)

Katara: They just won't listen to reason. (Aang flies back down to them.)
Aang: But they will listen to Aunt Wu.
Sokka: I know, that's the problem.
Aang: Well, it's about to become the solution. We're taking fate in our own ha(who has just emerged from the lake, holding a fish as if about to give it a kiss) Oh look! nds. First, I need to borrow Aunt Wu's cloud reading book.

(Cut to a shot of Aunt Wu's door. Katara and Sokka stand guard with guilty expressions on their faces. Pan up to see Aang and Momo entering Aunt Wu's house via the topmost balcony. Cut to a view of her reading room, where Aang is now searching. Momo makes a few chittering noises.)

Aang (whispering): Shh... we don't want anyone to hear us.

(The polished metal gong in front of Aang now shows Meng's reflection, an expression of surprise on her face. Aang sees the reflection and jumps, startled. He turns and faces her.)

Aang: Oh! I didn't see you there.
Meng: You don't like me. Do you? (She is sad, and her enormous hair braids wilt to match her mood.)
Aang: Of course I like you.
Meng: But not the way I like you.
Aang: Oh. I guess not.
Meng: It's ok. It's just really hard when you like someone, but they don't think of you that way.
Aang (sadly): I know what you mean.
Meng: She's beautiful, by the way.
Aang (he blushes): Huh?
Meng: That water tribe girl. I can see why you like her so much. (Counting each reason on her fingers.) She's sweet, she's a bender, and her hair seems so manageable. (She tries to mash her braids down and fails at this last reason. She looks crushed.)
Aang: Don't worry. You're gonna meet a great guy who's gonna completely fall for you. I know it. (He puts his hands on her shoulders.)
Meng: Thanks. (He turns to leave.) Wait! Don't you want this? (She hands Aang the cloud reading book which Meng had in her robe.)
Aang: How did you know?
Meng (nervously playing with her fingers): I've kind of been stalking you... heh!
Aang (blushing): Oh, thanks. I guess.

(Cut to shot of Appa flying through the clouds with Aang and Katara on his back.)

Aang: Clouds are made of water and air so between the two of us we ought to be able to bend them into any shape we want.
Katara (reading Aunt Wu's book): I found it. The symbol for volcanic doom.

(Cut to Aang and Katara bending the clouds. Below, the villagers look up to see the clouds shifting. Sokka brings Aunt Wu over to her stage. He points to the sky.)

Sokka: Aunt Wu, look! Something is happening in the clouds.
Aunt Wu: That's very strange. It shouldn't... Oh my!

(Cut to a view of the new skull-shaped cloud that Aang and Katara have created. Cut to a view of the mountain spewing smoke into the air. The screen pans down to the village square. Aang is addressing the crows.)

Aang: We can still save the village if we act fast. Sokka has a plan.
Sokka: Lava is gonna flow downhill to this spot. If we can dig a deep enough trench we can channel all the lava away from the village to the river.
Aang: If any of you are earthebenders come with me.

(Cut to shot of the twins in green from earlier in the episode.)

Twin in Green #1: I'm an earthbender!
Twin in Green #2: I'm not!
Sokka: Everybody else grab a shovel (explosion sounds)... come on, we've gotta hurry!

(Crowd disperses like lightning. Cut to shot of the ground outside of town. Appa and the townspeople labor to dig the trench, using both earthbending and manual means. Another explosion heralds a cut to the mountain again, now spewing lava.)

Sokka: Dig faster! Dig faster!

(The earthbending twin finally connects the trench to the river.)

Aang: Everyone needs to evacuate! We'll come for you when it's safe!

(Everyone runs. Cut to the volcano. The view pans down to the group. It is now precipitating ash. The scene cuts to a view of the village gate. Lava engulfs it and it begins to burn away. The world has taken on the eerie red tinge of the lava, which now passes through the cemetery, consuming headstones as it flows downhill. The lava reaches the trench and begins to fill rapidly, its progress temporarily halted. Cut to the group on the safe side of the trench.)

Katara: It's too much! It's gonna overflow!

(Another explosion rocks the village. Burning ejecta begins to rain down in addition to the ash. Katara and Sokka begin to run, but turn to see Aang hasn't moved. A huge boulder falls out of the sky and lands in the trench, exploding. Cut to Aang rushing forward with a furious warcry. He launches himself into the air and begins to airbend. As the lava begins to overflow, Aang blows the lava straight up, rather than allowing to advance on the village. Finally, he draws in a mighty intake of breath and expels it, airbending it as it exits, cooling all the lava to stone. Aang relaxes and assumes a meditation pose, calming himself after the massive exertion. Cut to Katara and Sokka watching in awe, the mountain still visibly erupting, but no longer threatening the village.)

Sokka: Man, sometimes I forget what powerful bender (Katara's expression instantly changes at this, remembering Aunt Wu's words) that kid is.
Katara: Wait, what did you just say?
Sokka: Nothing, just that Aang is one powerful bender.

(Cut to Katara's and Sokka's view of Aang. His figure is wreathed in red glow of the lava still seething behind the stone shield Aang has created.)

Katara: I suppose he is...

(Cut a day shot of the volcano, smoking, but no longer erupting. Clearly some time has passed between this scene and the last. Cut to a view of the square where Aunt Wu and the people, including the Calm Man, have assembled. Aang stands in front of Aunt Wu to address her, offering her back the cloud book he “borrowed.”)

Aang (sheepishly looking at the ground): By the way, we kind of borrowed your book.
Aunt Wu: So you messed with the clouds did you!

(She grabs the book in anger and Aang cringes. In the background, Katara looks guilty, while Sokka smiles and points at her, indicating that she was in on the cloud manipulation too.)

Aunt Wu (begins to laugh): Very clever!
Sokka: No offense, but I hope this taught everyone a lesson about not relying too much on fortunetelling.
Calm Man: But Aunt Wu predicted the village wouldn't be destroyed, and it wasn't. She was right, after all.
Sokka (getting right in the Calm Man's face): I hate you.
Katara (taking Sokka by the shoulders): It's ok, Sokka. Everything's gonna be all right.

(Cut to Aunt Wu and Aang, who were watching Sokka and the Calm Man. Aang turns to Aunt Wu.)

Aang: Can I ask you something?
Aunt Wu: Of course, honey.
Aang: You didn't really see love in my fortune, did you? You just told me what I wanted to hear.
Aunt Wu: I'll tell you a little secret, young Airbender. Just as you reshaped those clouds, you have the power to reshape your own destiny.

(Aang smiles. Cut to shot of Appa and the crowd. Katara is at Appa's reigns. Meng stands in front of Appa.)

Katara: Goodbye everyone! It was so nice to meet you! Take care, Meng.
Meng (waving goodbye): Take care! (Appa turns away, cut to Meng's face, whose smile disappears and is replaced by a frown.) Floozy.



[End Credits]
Act I

(The episode opens with a brief daytime shot of a shoreline. The surf breaks against jagged rocks that jut out of the ocean close to shore. Presumably nearby, a water tribe blade has been stuck in the ground in a forested area. Aang's hand enters the frame, then cut to a wider shot of Aang picking up the blade, Sokka coming up behind him.)

Aang: Hey look! A sword made out of a whale's tooth.
Sokka (grabbing it): Lemme see that.

(Sokka walks forward, examining the blade. Fade to a flashback of daytime at the South Pole. In the distance, many Water Tribe boats are being loaded with supplies. View pans left to reveal the back of a younger Sokka, a view soon replaced by a frontal shot of the boy. He holds his boomerang, a pained look of anticipated loss on his face. Flashback fades, his older face superimposed briefly on his younger face.)

Sokka: This is a water tribe weapon. (To Aang, behind him over he left shoulder.) See if you can find anything else.
Katara (entering wider shot): Did someone lose something?
Aang: (looking in a bush): No, we found something.

(Cut to Sokka brushing away some leaves from a broken arrow on the ground. He picks it up and inspects it.)

Sokka: It's burned.

(He throws it away and walks over to a tree with burn marks.)

Sokka: There was a battle. Water tribe warriors ambushed a group of firebenders.

(He looks down at the ground and begins to walk downhill as he interprets the signs left in the earth.)

Sokka: The firebenders fought back, but the warriors drove them down this hill...

(He runs down the hill, the others in tow. They soon come to the beach seen in the first clip.)

Aang: So then what happened?
Sokka: I don't know. The trail ends here.
Katara (pointing o.c. to the right): Wait! Look!

(Cut to a shot of a beached water tribe boat.)

Sokka (from o.c.): It's one of our boats!

(They all run to it. Cut to a wide shot of them staring up at the boat.)

Katara: Is this... Dad's boat?
Sokka (rubbing the ship's prow and smiling): No, but it's from his fleet. Dad was here.

(Cut to a close up of Iroh's face. He is drinking tea. He drinks and then cut to a shot of he and Zuko sitting at a table in a cabin on Zuko's ship. Iroh pours Zuko some tea after he takes his sip.)

Iroh: Ahh! See, Prince Zuko, a moment of quiet is good for your mental well being.

(As Zuko raises the cup to drink, a shock causes it to splash the tea all over he face. He wipes it away and gets up from table, making angry noises. Cut to the foredeck, where a young, dark haired woman has appeared on deck riding a massive and hideous monster. Members of Zuko's crew scatter as the monster climbs the railing and onto the deck.)

June: Get back! We're after a stowaway.
Zuko: There are no stowaways on my ship.

(The monster, a shirshu, proceeds to rip out a chunk of deck plating and hurls it aft. It sticks its head into the gaping hole, then cut to the shirshu's p.o.v. It can see smells. The stowaway's odor shows up as a smoky green trail on the screen which it follows. Nearby a barrel falls over and a man crawls out, whimpering. The man crawls out onto the foredeck where the shirshu quickly whips the back of his neck with its tongue. He falls instantly onto the deck, conscious but paralyzed, with Iroh and Zuko looking on in the background.)

Zuko: He's paralyzed.
June (picking the man up): Only temporarily. The toxins'll wear off in about an hour. But by then he'll be in jail and I'll have my money.
Zuko: But how did you find him on my ship?
June (petting her monster as she gets back in the saddle): My shirshu can smell a rat a continent away.
Iroh (admiring her): Well, I'm impressed.

(She cracks her whip and the shirshu bolts off the ship and down the dock. Cut back to Iroh.)

Iroh (stroking his chin): Very impressed.

(Cut to a shot of the full moon. The screen pans down to reveal the kids and Appa around a campfire in front of the water tribe boat they found on the beach. Katara and Aang are asleep, Sokka is not. He tends the fire in silence, lost in thought. A flashback begins. It is again daytime on the South Pole. The younger Sokka, his face painted for war, struggles to carry a sleeping bag and gear toward the boats. Cut to an older man, Hagoda, Katara and Sokka's father, helping to load a boat. He sees his son and walks to him.)

Hakoda: Sokka...
Sokka: I'm coming with you.
Hakoda: You're not old enough to go to war, Sokka, you know that.
Sokka (his eyes pleading): I'm strong! I'm brave! I can fight! Please, Dad!
Hakoda (putting a hand on his shoulder): Being a man is knowing where you're needed the most, and for you right now that's here protecting your sister.
Sokka (eyes watering): I don't understand.
Hakoda: Someday you will. (Sokka drops his sleeping bag and hugs his father.) I'm going to miss you so much.

(Sokka cries, his father's hand on his head. The flashback fades to the present. In the present, Sokka stares at the fire for another moment before hearing a sound and standing up.)

Sokka: Who's there?

(Cut to a bandaged water tribe man approaching the camp.)

Bato: Sokka?
Sokka: Bato?
Aang (waking up in the background): Who the what now?
Katara: Bato!
Bato: Sokka! Katara! (Hugging them both.) It is so good to see you two! Oh, you've grown so much.
Aang (bowing): Hi, I'm Aang.
Sokka: Where's Dad?
Katara: Is he here?
Bato: No, he and the other warriors should be in the eastern Earth Kingdom by now.

(The wind picks up and they all shiver.)

Bato: Brr! This is no place for a reunion. Let's get inside.

(He puts his arms around Katara and Sokka's shoulder and motions Aang to follow. Cut to Appa beginning to walk away from the campfire after them, then cut to another shot of the moon. The camera pans down to show a monastery complex as Bato begins to narrate from o.c. Then the kids, Appa and Bato appear walking in through the main gate.)

Bato: After I was wounded, your father carried me to this abbey. The sisters have cared for me ever since. (To one of the nearby women.) Superior, these are Hakoda's children. They've been traveling with the Avatar. I found them by my boat.
Superior (bowing): Young Avatar, it gives me great joy to be in your presence. Welcome to our abbey.
Aang (bowing): Thank you! It's truly an honor to be here. If there's anything –
Sokka (cutting Aang off): What smells so good, Bato? (He sniffs the air.)
Bato: The sisters craft ointments and perfumes.
Sokka: Perfume? Maybe we could dump some on Appa? Because he stinks so much! Am I right?

(Cut to Bato and Katara, who are not amused.)

Bato: You have your father's wit.

(Cut to a wooden door opening to reveal Bato and the two kids.)

Katara: Bato! It looks like home!
Sokka: Everything's here, even the pelts!

(The pair examine the comforts of the room. Cut to Aang holding Momo, looking a little disconcerted.)

Aang: Yeh, nothing's more comforting than dead animal skins.

(Momo hops down and examine the head of a bear skin rug. The mouth of the bear closes suddenly, scaring Momo into climbing back up to Aang's shoulder. Cut to a pot over the fire in the center of the room. Katara's hand opens the pot and then the camera zooms back to show her looking at Sokka to her left, with Baton sitting down on the opposite side of the fire.)

Katara: No way! Stewed sea prunes?
Bato: Help yourself.
Sokka: Dad could eat a whole barrel of these things.

(Katara puts some in bowl, then cut to Aang with a bowl in his hands. He sniffs it and makes a sound of disgust. Cut to a wider shot of the room. Aang sits back from the group having put the untouched bowl of stew beside him. As the conversation continues, Momo tastes the stew, spits it back out and runs away.)

Katara: Bato, is it true you and Dad lassoed an arctic hippo?
Bato: It was your father's idea. He just dragged me along. Well, the hippo did the dragging.
Aang: Hey, I ride animals too! One time there was this giant eel –
Sokka (cutting Aang off): So who was it that came up with the great blubber fiasco?
Bato (laughing): You knew about that?
Katara: Everyone does.
Aang: What's that story?
Sokka: It's a long one, Aang, some other time.

(Aang looks sad in the background. The others don't notice.)

Katara: You and Dad had so many hilarious adventures.
Bato: Not all of which were hilarious at the time, but everything's funny with hindsight. (Then to o.c.) Aang, put that down (cut to Aang wearing some kind of animal skin headdress), it's ceremonial and very fragile.

(Aang puts it back on the wall and walks off dejected while the others continue from o.c. He sits down, back to the wall, near the door. Momo joins him.)

Sokka: Was it you or Dad that put an octopus on your head and convinced Gran-Gran you were a water spirit?
Bato: Your dad wore the octopus, but (in a sinister tone) I did the spooky voice.

(Cut to a scene that same night of the exterior of a squat, three story building with many windows. As the camera pans in, it is clear that the building is packed with people. Cut to a view of the front door where Junee's shirshu can be seen to its right. A few other patrons of the establishment can be seen. Suddenly someone gets thrown through the wall above the door, landing in the foreground and crying out painfully upon impact. Cut to a close of the tattoo of a curled red snake on June's right shoulder, then pan the camera zooms backward to reveal June arm-wrestling a beefy man. They are in a tavern that is filled to capacity with revelers. The beefy man is sweating in his attempt to best the beautiful bounty hunter. She does not even appear to be trying. Suddenly, Zuko appears, forcing his way through the crowd.)

Zuko: Out of my way! Step aside, filth!

(Iroh appears in Zuko's wake with a smile, addressing the people his nephew has just thrust aside.)

Iroh: He means no offense! I'm sure you bathe regularly.

(Zuko and Iroh at the table where June is arm-wrestling. During the conversation the beefy man continues to grunt and struggle against June's grip.)

Zuko: I need to talk to you.
June: Well, if it isn't my new friends, Angry Boy and Uncle Lazy.

(Iroh laughs heartily for a moment before June ends the contest with one swift movement. The crowd erupts and a lot of money changes hands, much of it ending up in a big pile in front of June.)

Zuko: Your beast trashed my ship. You have to pay me back.
June (raking in the pile of coins): Aww, I'd love to help you out, but I'm a little short on money. (To the crowd) Drinks on me!
All : YEHHH!!!!
Zuko (grabbing her hand as she raises her cup to her lips): Money isn't what I had in mind.

(Cut to a close up of one of the lamps outside the front door of the tavern. Moths fly around it. Cut to a view of Zuko holding Katara's necklace.)

Zuko (from o.c.): I need you to find someone.
June: What happened? Your girlfriend run off on you?
Zuko: It's not the girl I'm after, it's the bald monk she's traveling with.
June: Whatever you say.
Zuko: If you find them, I'll consider the damage to my ship paid for.
June: Heh! Forget it.

(She turns and begins to climb into her saddle.)

Iroh: Plus we'll pay your weight in gold.

(She smiles, gets down and walks over to Iroh.)

June: Make it your weight and we got a deal.
Iroh (laughing): You got it!
June (grabbing the necklace from Zuko's hand): Get on.

(June walks over to the shirshu and lets it smell the necklace. Cut to p.o.v. of shirshu. The necklace reeks with a purple stench. It scans the area and finds Katara's trail. Cut back to a view of the shirshu's slobbering mouth full of teeth, then camera cuts to June jumping into the saddle in front of Zuko and Iroh. They take off. Cut to a long, exterior shot of the abbey still that same night. Bato begins to speak o.c., then cut back to his room as the conversation continues. Aang is still slumped against the wall away from the others. His eyes are closed.)

Bato: There's something I should tell you kids. I'm expecting a message from your father.
Katara: Really?
Sokka: When?
Bato: Any day now. Your father said he'd send a message when they found the rendezvous point. If you wait here until the message arrives you can come with me and see your father again.

(Aang has straightened up at this and looks over at his friends, clearly worried that he might lose them.)

Sokka: It's been over two years since we've seen Dad! That would be so incredible. Katara?
Katara: I do really miss him. It would be great to see Dad.

(The Avatar looks downcast at this, loneliness and worry on his face. He walks out of the room and shuts the door behind him and walks down the road away from the abbey. Cut back to the others.)

Bato: It's been far too long, hasn't it? I'm not sure when word will arrive, but when it does...
Sokka (less exuberantly): It would be great, but we can't. We have to take Aang to the North Pole first.
Katara: Even if we had time to wait for the message, who knows how far we'd have to travel. We don't have time for a long detour.
Bato: I'm sure your father would understand and be proud that his children are helping the Avatar.

(Cut to a moonlit shot of the beach, where Aang sits huddled on the prow of Bato's boat.)

Aang: I can't believe they would leave me.

(He looks up at the sound of a messenger approaching on some kind of bipedal lizard.)

Messenger: I'm looking for Bato of the Water Tribe.
Aang: Uh, I know Bato.
Messenger (giving Aang a scroll): Make sure he gets this.

(Messenger rides off. Aang, with Momo peering over his shoulder, opens the scroll to reveal a map.)

Aang: It's the map to Sokka and Katara's Dad!

(He crumples it in anger, stuffs it into his left sleeve, and crouches back down. Cut to wider shot of him on the boat then fade to commercial break.)



Act II

(The show returns with a long shot of the abbey's exterior. Cut to a shot of the door to Bato's room opening. Camera zooms back to reveal Aang entering in the background, Sokka, Katara and Bato in the foreground, still sitting around the fire.)

Aang: Hey everyone! Sorry I was gone so long.
Katara: Hey Aang, I didn't notice you left.
Aang (with exaggerated happiness): Yup, but now I'm back. Sure...could go for some delicious sea prunes!

(He sits down, grabs a bowl and begins to munch. After a few seconds he spits them back out. Cut to Katara and Bato looking at him strangely, with Sokka's head entering the screen from the right, a similar expression on his face. Cut to a daytime view of the deserted town on the hillside seen in “The Blue Spirit.” At the base of the hill in the old, decrepit town square, the Herbalist is crouched near the ground harvesting some plants. Near her is her cat, Miyuki, who tenses and hisses at the sound of the shirshu approaching. The Herbalist rises and the shot cuts wide to show the old woman looking at the three atop the shirshu.)

Herbalist (unafraid): Out for a bit of fresh air, are we?
Zuko: We're looking for someone.
Herbalist: I hope it's not Miyuki. (Looking down at her cat) Miyuki, did you get in trouble with the Fire Nation again?

(The cat meows and backs away.)

June: The Avatar's been through here. Let's keep moving.

(She cracks her whip and the shirshu takes off. Cut to a shot of the abbey's exterior, and then to a shot of Appa lying down munching on hay. Near a huge pile of hay, Aang airbends another load of hay in front of Appa, who takes a huge bite. The map falls out of Aang's sleeve. Cut to close up of the crumpled map as a hand picks it up.)

Sister (from o.c.): Ha! I caught you! You should be ashamed of yourself...(Aang looks guilty and afraid)...littering in the courtyard.
Aang (taking the map back): I'm sorry! I'll take care of this.

(He bows nervously and the sister walks off. He stuffs the map back under his hood. Cut to a panning shot of the woods that ends back on the beach. Bato and the kids are approaching his boat.)

Bato: This ship is sentimental to me. It was built by my father.

(Aang looks down and sees the tracks of the messenger's beast. He airbends the entire trail away, then turns back to the others, whistling guiltily.)

Sokka: Is this the boat he took you ice-dodging in?
Bato: Yeh, it's got the scar to prove it. Huh. How about you, Sokka? You must have some good stories from your first time ice-dodging?
Katara: He never got to go. Dad left before he was old enough.
Bato: Oh, I forgot, you were too young.
Aang: What's ice-dodging?
Bato: It's a rite of passage for young water tribe members. When you turn fourteen your Dad takes you... you know what (putting a hand on Sokka's shoulder, who looks downcast), you're about to find out.

(Sokka smiles. Cut to a shot of Aunt Wu's village from “The Fortuneteller.” The mighty lava floes, hardened to stone by Aang's airbending, surround the village, ominous, but harmless. Cut to a view of the main square from one of the alleys. People run into it screaming, fleeing the shirshu and its riders who soon enter the frame. Cut to Aunt Wu, looking serene, if not entirely pleased. Cut to a wider shot of Aunt Wu standing to the left of the closed circular door to her building. The shirshu and its riders enter the frame.)

Zuko: Why are we stopping?
June: Because the girl must of spent a lot of time here.
Zuko (grabbing the necklace from June's hand): We have no time for this!

(He gets down and shows the shirshu the necklace again. He narrowly avoids getting zapped by its tongue.)

Zuko: Hey, watch it!

(Iroh laughs.)

June: Oh look, he likes you.

(Cut to Aunt Wu looking up at Iroh.)

Aunt Wu: Care to hear your fortune, handsome?
Iroh (smiling): At my age there is really only one big surprise left, and I'd just as soon leave it a mystery.

(June whips the shirshu, who takes off once again as Aunt Wu watches. Cut to Bato's boat cutting through the waves near the shore. Treacherous rocks are visible in both the foreground and background.)

Bato: Ice-dodging is a ceremonial test of wisdom, bravery and trust. In our village it was done by weaving a boat through a field of icebergs.
Sokka: How are we supposed to ice-dodge without ice?
Bato: You will be dodging...those.

(Bato points ahead. Cut to a pan left shot that reveals the path ahead of the boat to be a veritable thicket of stalagmite like rocks. Cut back to Bato leaving the tiller as Sokka and Katara move aft.)

Bato: Sokka, you steer and call the shots. Lead wisely. Katara, you secure the mainsail. The winds can be brutal, so be brave. Aang, you control the jib, without your steady hand we all go down. Your position is about trust.
Aang (Looking nervous and guilty): I know that! Why wouldn't I know that? I'm the Avatar! I know about trust.

(Aang pouts and folds his hands across his chest. Bato walks over to the bow and sits down.)

Bato: For this to be done right I cannot help. You pass or fail on your own.

(Cut to the kids, Sokka at the tiller, the other two holding on to their respective sails, all looking frightened as the ships speeds towards the rocks. Cut back to Sokka, whose expression hardens.)

Sokka: Aang, ease up on the jib. Katara, steady! Aang, less sail! (Sokka, sweating, pulls the tiller to his right) Katara, give him room!

(Cut to Aang hauling rope, then cut to the ship weaving in and out of the rocks.)

Sokka: Aang! Helm to lee! Helm to lee!
Aang: What does that even mean!?

(All three struggle against their loads, cut to the ship narrowly missing a huge pile of rock.)

Sokka: Great job!

(Cut to overhead shot of the ship entering a cul de sac, ringed by jagged rocks, at high speed. Cut back to Katara, Bato getting up in the background.)

Katara: There's no way through!
Sokka: We can make it!
Bato: Sokka, you've already proven yourself, maybe we should –
Sokka: Aang, I'm gonna need air in that sail! (Aang nods.) Katara, I want you to bend as much water as you can between us and those rocks! (Cut to zooming close up of Sokka's determined face.) Now!

(Aang and Katara jump to it. Aang starts pushing wave after wave of air into the sail, while Katara raises the ship up on an accelerating wave of water. The wave carries the speeding ship safely over the ring of jagged rocks. Sokka falls back on the tiller with a sigh of relief, cut to the others smiling. Fade to a long shot of the boat back on the beach, then cut to Bato's bandages hand scooping some black face paint out of a bowl.)

Bato: The spirits of water bear witness to these marks. For Sokka, the mark of the wise, the same mark your father earned.

(He marks Sokka's head with dot and a half circle mark above it.)

Bato: For Katara, the mark of the brave. Your courage inspires us.

(He marks her head with a crescent shaped mark.)

Bato: And for Aang, the mark of the trusted. You are now an honorary member of the water tribe.

(He marks Aang's forehead with a half circle mark.)

Aang: I can't.
Katara: Of course you can!
Aang (rubbing off the mark): No, you can't trust me.

(He backs away, his head hung low. Cut to a wider shot of the whole group.)

Katara: Aang, what are you talking about.
Aang (holding out the crumpled scroll): A messenger gave this to me for Bato. (Katara looks at the scroll and draws in a breath of surprise.) You have to understand, I was afraid you'd –
Sokka (looking at the map, and then Aang in hurt and surprise): This is the map to our father! You had it the whole time!? How could you? (Aang shrivels up.) Well, you can go to the North Pole on your own! I'm going to find Dad.

(Cut to wide shot with Sokka stalking away angrily.)

Bato: Now Sokka, I think you should –
Sokka: Katara, are you with me?
Katara (looking at Aang, then lowering her eyes): I'm with you, Sokka.

(She turns away, then cut to the three water tribe members leaving Aang alone on the beach. Fade to commercial break.)



Act III

(The show returns to another daytime long shot of the abbey. Cut to the three water tribe members putting backpacks on in the abbey's main courtyard, Aang sitting on Appa in the background looking dejected. Katara walks sadly over to Aang.)

Katara: Good luck.
Aang: Okay. You too.

(She walks out of the gate of the abbey, Bato and Sokka following. The Superior approaches Aang, who still sits on Appa.)

Aang: Guess I should be moving on.
Superior: That would be best.

(He shakes Appa's reigns, who walks them out of the gate. Cut to Aang sitting the driver's seat looking to his left at the retreating figures of his friends in the distance. Momo clings to one of Appa's horns.)

Aang: I'm an idiot, Momo.

(Fade to another overhead shot of the abbey, then cut to a group of sisters making perfume. The approach of the shirshu from o.c. can be heard. Cut to a shot of the gate, which bursts open, revealing the shirshu and its riders. Cut to the shirshu's p.o.v., where Katara's smell can be seen all over the courtyard.)

June: We're getting close.

(June whips the shirshu again and it bounds out of the gate and up the road the Katara, Sokka and Bato used. Cut to the three walking through the walks along that same road. In the distance, a wolf can be heard. They stop to listen.)

Katara: That wolf sounds so sad.
Sokka: It's probably wounded.
Bato: No, it's been separated from the pack. I understand that pain. It's how I felt when the water tribe warriors had to leave me behind. They were my family and being apart from them was more painful than my wounds.

(Close up of Sokka's face. He is sad. A flashback begins of him on the South Pole once again, this time watching his father's fleet depart into the mist. The flashback ends, revealing Sokka looking down at the ground, Katara and Bato behind him.)

Katara: Sokka?
Sokka (after a pause): We need to go back. I want to see Dad, but helping Aang is where we're needed the most.
Katara (smiling): You're right.
Bato (putting a hand on each of their shoulders): Your father will understand. And I know he's proud of you.
Sokka: Thanks, Bato.
Bato: I know where to go from here. (He gives Sokka the map). Take this in case you want to find us. I'll leave a message at the rendezvous point.

(Pan up to the sky, then cut to Appa, Aang and Momo on the beach near Bato's boat.)

Aang: Looks like we're going alone, guys.

(The Superior rushes up to him.)

Superior: Avatar! You must leave!
Aang: Okay, I get it. Everybody wants me gone.
Superior: A group of people came to the abbey looking for you.
Aang (in alarm): Who?
Superior: A fierce looking woman with a horrible monster and a young man with a scar.
Aang: Zuko!
Superior: The beast was using the scent of a necklace to follow you.
Aang: A necklace? (Eyes suddenly going wide) Huh! Katara!

(Cut to an overhead shot of the abbey in the distance. The screen pans down, following the road to were Sokka and Katara walk directly below. Cut to a frontal shot of the pair, where Sokka motions for his sister to stop as a galloping sound from o.c. is heard. The shirshu jumps into the frame behind them and they run, the monster and its riders in pursuit. Switch to the monster's p.o.v., where it can see Katara's scent all over the place. It focuses on her and it sees her completely colored the purple of her own scent. Cut back to a view of the shirshu and its riders.)

June: So this is your girlfriend. (Zuko hops down and approaches her.) No wonder she left. She's way too pretty for you.
Zuko: Where is he? Where's the Avatar?
Sokka (defiantly): We split up! He's long gone.
Zuko: How stupid do you think I am?
Sokka: Pretty stupid. (Grabbing Katara by the arm) Run!

(They run, but the shirshu paralyzes them both with its tongue before they get very far.)

Zuko: What are we supposed to do now?
June: It's seeking a different scent – perhaps something that the Avatar held.

(The shirshu moves forward and starts sniffing the paralyzed pair. The map scroll falls out of Sokka's backpack and rolls onto the ground. Cut to the shirshu's p.o.v., where the scroll is covered in a blue scent. The trail leads back into the woods. Cut to the courtyard of the abbey and its hastily repaired gate. This is blown open again as the monster and its riders bust through again, sending sisters running away screaming in all directions. The shirshu begins walking around, sniffing.)

Zuko: What's it doing? It's just going around in a circle!

(Cut to the monster's p.o.v. as it follows the blue scent around. Finally it looks up into the air to see the scent spiraling around. Suddenly Aang enters the frame on his glider. He flies up to the monster, which jumps up to snap at him. He misses, but does manage to dump his riders onto the floor of the courtyard. The shirshu also falls flat on his back.)

Katara: Aang!

(June gets up and whips the ground. The shirshu gets up and roars, June jumping onto its back. They charge after Aang. Cut to a camera angle from just behind Aang as the pair bear down on him. Right before impact, Appa enters the frame from the right and plows right into the shirshu, pushing him and his rider out the left side of the frame. They plow into the wall of building, knocking a whole through it. Cut to a close of Appa, a fiery grin on his face. He breathes heavily out his nostrils.

Cut to Aang, whose smile turns to alarm as he turns away from Appa to face Zuko, whose hands are alight with fire as he advances on the Avatar. He fires a huge gout of flame at Aang, who blocks it by twirling his staff to break it up. They trade several rounds of blows, all of which miss or are blocked. Finally the two fire volleys simultaneously and both are blown backwards onto the roofs behind them.

Cut to a zooming shot of June next to the shirshu, both unconscious. Iroh rushes up to the bounty hunter and pats the side of her face. She wakes up, rises to her feet. She cracks her whips and says something unintelligible. Then shirshu rises to its feet, she jumps in the saddle and they head back into battle. They charge Appa who is on the other side of the courtyard. Appa soars into the air as they reach him, but the shirshu lashes Appa's tail with his tongue. Appa lands on the other side of the courtyard. He struggles to stay standing, but fails. He collapses in a cloud of dust. Cut to a close of Appa's face, where his visible eye opens, then cut to a wider shot of him getting to his feet. The monsters charge each other after June whips the shirsu again, and they have a head on collision, throwing June over Appa's head, whom she whips as she passes. She lands on the ground and rolls away just as Appa's foot plants itself deep into the ground where she had just been.

Cut to Aang who gets up groggily from where he'd fallen on the roof. His eyes go wide as the camera cuts to Zuko charging him down the spine of the roof. He throws a blast of the fire at the Avatar who flips over Zuko's head to land behind him. They exchange blows with Aang eventually knocking Zuko off the roof. He is instantly replaced, however, when June and the shirshu jump onto the roof and pursue him. In the background, Appa turns down in the courtyard and uses his tail to create a gale that blows tiles off the roof as the shirshu passes.

Shift to Katara and Sokka leaning up against the wall of the abbey. Sokka is wiggling his arm a bit.)

Sokka: I'm starting to get some feeling back! (A bunch of tiles fall on them) Ow!

(A few more melee shots of Aang being pursued is replaced by Iroh testing out perfumes nearby. He finds one he likes, looks from side to side to make sure no one is looking and then tucks the bottle into his robe, a mischievous smile on his face.

Cut back to Aang and Zuko dueling once again, this time a covered well is between them. They trade volleys. Aang suddenly sees Katara's necklace in Zuko's hand.)

Aang: You've got something I want!

(They trade volleys again with Zuko soon destroying the well's covering. They dance around on the lip of the well, neither one able to gain decisive advantage over the other. Aang keeps trying to grab the necklace, but fails. Then Zuko lunges after Aang and misses. As he passes, Aang uses puts his foot through the loop of the necklace, catching it. He then disappears down the well, with Zuko firing a huge gout of flame after him in frustration. Zuko is launched into the air as Aang reappears atop a huge jet of water and lands in the foreground. Rain from the huge jet of water begins to fall around him, quickly followed by Zuko hitting the ground.

Zuko gets up and the duel begins anew, but this time Appa advances threateningly on Zuko. Before Appa can strike him, however, the shirshu lashes him three times in a row with his tongue. Appa tries to stay up, but can't. He keels over, paralyzed.

Cut to Sokka and Katara. The Superior puts some kind of perfume under their noses and they are then able to move better.)

Sokka: That thing sees with its nose. Let's give him something to look at.
Superior: The perfume?

(Sokka nods. Cut to pairs of sisters and Sokka moving huge white pots of perfume out into the courtyard. Cut to Aang dodging Zuko's fire blasts and the shirshu's tongue on the opposite wall. Cut back to the sisters who then they dump the perfume onto the ground. Katara waterbends the perfume into a huge sheet, moves it over the shirshu, and drops it. The monster shakes off the liquid, but a cut to its p.o.v. reveals that it s now terribly confused. Switch to a shot of Zuko getting tongue lashed by the monster, followed by June.)

Iroh: June! Noooo!

(Iroh catches the falling bounty hunter. Cut back to the rampaging shirshu. It breaks open a few more jars, paws the tiles of the roof of one of the buildings, then jumps over the wall and disappears. Cut to Aang picking up his staff, Katara and Sokka approaching him from behind. Switch to Zuko and Iroh laying flat on the ground. Iroh has June draped across his chest, his arm around her.)

Zuko: Uncle? I didn't see you get hit with the tongue.
Iroh: Shh!

(June's eyes open, clearly displeased. Cut to Appa flying through the sky at sunset.)

Aang: So, where do we go?
Katara: We're getting you to the North Pole.
Sokka: Yeh, we've lost too much time as it is.
Aang: Don't you want to see your father?
Sokka: Of course we do, Aang. But, you're our family too, and right now, you need us more.
Katara: And we need you.
Aang: I wish I could give you a little piece of home, Katara. Something to remind you –
Katara: I'll be okay.
Aang: Still, just a little trinket. Maybe something like...this!

(Aang jumps up, proudly offering Katara her necklace, a huge smile on his face.)

Katara (grabbing the necklace and putting it on happily): Aang, how did you get that?
Aang (smiling): Zuko asked to be sure I got it to you.
Katara (in mock appreciation): Oh, that's so sweet of Zuko. Would you give him a kiss for me when you see him?
Aang: Sure!

(Katara kisses Aang's cheek. He blushes and twiddles his thumbs. Cut to Appa flying off to the horizon, then fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Opening shot of the forest floor. It seems to be late afternoon. A split second later, Momo appears. He looks around, and then jumps out of the frame. In the background, a blurry shadow scurries among the trees. Cut to a long shot of Momo flying through the forest canopy. The view pans down as he flies and comes to rest on a circular notice board. Appa and the kids are there inspecting it. Cut to a side view of Katara walking up to read the notice board, Sokka in the background emptying a food bag right into his mouth.)

Katara: This should give us a good idea of what's around here.
Sokka (finishing with the empty bag): See if you can find a menu, I'm starving.

(Aang rushes into the frame from the right and points at a colorful flyer on the board.)

Aang: I bet we'll find something to eat here! (Cut to a frontal shot of the flyer). The Fire Days Festival. (Reading the flyer.) Fire Nation cultural exhibits...jugglers, benders, magicians. This'd be a great place for me to study some real firebenders!
Sokka (from other side of the board): You might wanna rethink that. Look at this.

(Cut to a shot of the side of the board Sokka is looking at. The color flyer on top is a wanted poster of Aang. On the lower right is a wanted poster for the Blue Spirit. On the right is a wanted poster for a white haired man.)

Aang: Hey, a poster of me!
Sokka: A wanted poster. This is bad.

(Aang takes the poster off the board as Katara comes and looks at it as well.)

Katara: I think we better keep moving.
Aang: I have to learn firebending at some point, and this could be my only chance to watch a master up close.
Katara (looking at the ground, unsure): I guess we could check it out.
Sokka: What!? You want to walk into a Fire Nation town where they're all fired up with all their, you know, fire?
Katara: We'll wear disguises and if it looks like trouble, we'll leave.

(Katara and Aang walk over to Appa.)

Sokka (to no one): Yeh, because we always leave before we get into trouble.

(Sokka turns and walks toward the others while the camera zooms up to the wanted poster for the white haired man. Cut to an overhead shot of the kids and Appa coming out of the forest on a slight hill. In the distance, the walled Fire Nation town can be seen. It is now dusk. Cut to Aang looking backwards to speak to Appa and Momo.)

Aang: You guys stay out of sight here while we go to the festival.

(Cut to a frontal shot of Appa, Momo perched on his neck. Momo then flies up and then drops down into a small bush nearby. Appa follows and tries to hide behind the bush, which is about a foot tall. Cut back to Aang, who turns to speak to his friends.)

Aang: Ready disguises!

(Cut to Sokka, who pulls down the hood of a black cloak over his head, then cut to Katara who does the same thing. Finally, cut to Aang, who has pulled his red hood up over the top of his head in a completely ineffective attempt to change his appearance. He sees his friends and grins in some embarrassment. Cut to Sokka, hands folded, with Katara laughing to his right.)

Sokka (sarcastically): It's like you're a whole different person.
Aang: Let's go.

(Cut to shot of them walking down the hill towards the town, then cut to a brief shot of a masked man, the shadow from earlier, watching them go to the town. Scene shifts to an overhead shot of the Fire Nation town and its main square, which is full of people. Overhead, the sky is filled with colorful fireworks. Cut to a frontal shot of the three entering the main square. Around them children frolic, revelers run by in ornate costumes, including several people almost completely concealed in a Chinese dragon outfit, and all participants are wearing colorful masks.)

Katara: I think we need some new disguises.
Sokka (skeptical and annoyed): Where are we gonna get masks like that?

(Shot expands to show a stall selling masks on their right.)

Mask Merchant: Get your genu-ine Fire Festival masks here!
Sokka (as Aang and Katara rush over): That was surprisingly easy.

(Cut to three turning away from the stall, each now wearing a mask. At first Sokka is wearing a happy mask and Aang a sad one. Katara switches them, revealing Sokka's sour puss face and Aang's wide smile. The masks now match the temperament of the owner. They walk into the square.)

Aang (pointing ahead, o.c.): Hey, there's some food.
Sokka (running ahead): Finally! (To food merchant): What do you have?
Food Merchant: Flaming fire flakes! Best in town.

(Cut to a little steaming bag in the merchants hand. Sokka grabs them.)

Sokka: I'll take'em!

(He stuffs them in his mouth, then starts screaming and blowing steam from his mouth. He partially removes his mask to cool his tongue.)

Sokka: Aaahhh! Hot! Hot!
Katara (Crossing her arms): "Flaming fire flakes" hot? What do you know.
Aang (looking o.c. to his right): Hey, look at this.

(Cut to the three walking up to a Punch & Judy show that is about to begin. The audience is full of children. The curtain of the puppet stage draws open and a puppet of the Fire Lord appears. The audience cheers, then cut to a close up of the puppet.)

Puppet Fire Lord: Don't worry loyal citizens! No one can surprise the Fire Lord!

(Behind him an earthbender puppet has risen up, with a rock at the ready to strike the Fire Lord Puppet. Cut to the children in the audience who start to cry out warnings. The Fire Lord puppet turns suddenly and torches the earthbender puppet with a huge gout of flame. The audience cheers. Cut to an overhead shot where the three turn away from the puppet show and head back towards another stage with a large crowd. On this stage there is a single performer.)

Katara: Aang, hold on! Where are we going?
Aang: I don't know, but there's a big crowd so it must be good.
Sokka: Knowing the Fire Nation, it's probably an execution.

(Cut to a closer shot of the stage, which has four thin pillars with fire basins at their tops. The performer is a firebender who is manipulating fire for the crowd's delight. He concludes by extinguishing his fire and producing a small flock of white birds who fly off the stage. Cut to the three, with Aang partially removing his mask to follow the flight of the birds. He looks ahead, a big smile on his face.)

Aang: I gotta learn that trick!
Performer (to the crowd): Thank you! For my next trick I need a volunteer from the audience!
Aang (raising his hand and waving it about): Oh! Oh! Me! Me!
Sokka: What do you think you're doing?
Aang: I want to get a closer look.
Katara: It's better that we don't attract any attention to ourselves.
Performer (pointing at Katara): How about you, little lady?
Katara (backing away and shaking her head): Uh
Performer: Awww, she's shy. Leeet's give her some encouragement, folks!

(Someone from the audience pushes Katara over to the edge of the stage where the Performer grabs her and hauls her up.)

Aang: Awww! That could'a been me.

(View zooms into the crowd to show that the masked figure from earlier has penetrated the edges of the audience. Cut back to a long shot of the stage. The performer, carrying a chair, ushers Katara to the center of the stage. Once there he seats her on the chair.)

Performer: This next trick is called "Taming the Dragon." (To Katara) You will be my captured princess!

(He ties her up with a maroon ribbon and begins to firebend a huge fire comet from the fires at the top of each pillar. He loops it close to Katara and back out. He seems to control it by a flame rope that connects its head to the Performer's hand.)

Performer: Don't worry, young maiden! I will tame this fiery beast! (He plays with the fire comet for a bit more, then continues) It's too strong, I can't hold it!
Aang: We gotta help her!
Sokka: No, we don't want to make a scene!
Performer: The rope, it's breaking!

(The rope breaks and the comet charges right for Katara, who cringes and cries out. Shift to Aang airbending himself up and out of the frame, both Sokka and the masked man just failing to restrain him. Cut to a frontal shot of Katara in the chair. Aang drops in from the sky, turns and creates a whirlwind that dissipates the comet in with a shower of confetti.)

Performer (from the stage floor where he'd fallen): Hey, you tryin' to upstage me, kid?

(Cut to Aang, watching the confetti rain down on him. Zoom back to reveal the crowd which starts to 'boo' him. Aang tries to amuse them with a lame dance while Sokka unties Katara in the background. Suddenly, someone speaks up.)

Audience Member: Hey! That kid's the Avatar!

(Aang freezes, a look of horror on this face. Cut to three Fire Nation guards who turn to face the camera at the mention of his name. They begin muscling through the crowd to the stage. Cut back to the three who have now removed their masks.)

Sokka: I think it's time to go.
Chey (from o.c.): Follow me! I can git ya outta here!

(Camera pans right to reveal a broken wall at the back of the stage. The masked man waves to them through it, prompting them to follow.)

Guard: There they are!

(They run through the broken wall just as the guards burst onstage. The masked man throws a smoke bomb at the guards feet, obscuring the view. Cut to a few shots of the kids and the masked man running through squares and alleys.)

Guard #2 (pointing at them as they pass): Over there!
Aang: I'm calling Appa!

(Groups of pursing guards link up behind them as Aang produces his bison whistle and blows.)

Sokka: I hope he can really hear that bison whistle!
Chey (turning into an alley): This way! (It's a dead end.) Okay! Not this way!

(They turn, but the exit is blocked by guards. The masked man throws another exploding smoke bomb and then run past them into another alley. This one is a dead too. It ends in a high wall. On the other side is a huge supply dump of fireworks. Cut to an overhead shot that reveals Appa has arrived just in time.)

Aang: Appa! Down here!

(Appa lands between the kids and the guards, with his tail facing the guards. Appa flaps his beaver like tail on the ground and the gale that results blows the guards out of the alley to land in a confused heap some distance away. As the guards run back into the alley, Appa can be seen already airborne. Cut to the masked man on Appa's back. He bites the top off a some kind of bomb like object, whose fuse is now lit. He throws it at the fireworks supply and it blows up in an awesome display of colors and sounds. Cut to the masked man removing his hood as they cruise away, watching the town and the fireworks from afar.)

Aang: Nice touch setting off the fireworks.
Sokka: You seem to really know your explosives.
Chey (turning to them): I'm familiar.
Sokka (surprised): You're a Fire Nation soldier!
Chey: Was. My name's Chey.

(Cut to a night scene with Appa and the others around a camp fire. Appa is dozing.)

Chey: I serve a man. More than a man really, he's a myth, but he's real, a living legend, Jeong Jeong the Deserter. He was a Fire Nation general, or wait, was he an admiral?
Sokka: He was very highly ranked, we get it.
Chey: Yeh! Way up there! But he couldn't take the madness any more. He's the first person ever to leave the army - and live. I'm the second, but you don't get to be a legend for that. That's okay though. Jeong Jeong's a firebending genius. Some say he's mad - but he's not! He's enlightened.
Aang: You mean there's a firebender out here who's not with the Fire Lord? (Standing up) We've gotta go see him! He can train me!
Sokka: We're not gonna go find some crazy firebender!
Chey (standing up): He's not crazy! He's a genius! And he's the perfect person to train the Avatar! That's why I followed you into the festival.
Sokka (standing up): Look, thanks for the help, but we're leaving for the north pole in the morning.
Aang (hurt): Sokka, this could be my only chance to meet a firebending master who would actually be willing to teach me.
Katara (standing up as well): It can't hurt just to talk to him.
Sokka: That's what you said about going to the festival! Why doesn't anyone ever listen to me!?

(As Sokka turns to stalk away from the group, he almost runs right into a spear. In a flash, they are surrounded by men wearing straw hats and armor and wielding spears.)

Lin Yi: Don't move!



Act II

(When the show returns, the kids and Appa are being led through the forest at night by the rebels.)

Lin Yi: Jeong Jeong told you not to look for Avatar!
Sokka: Hold on, you know these guys!?
Chey: Oh yeh! Lin Yi's an old buddy! Right Lin Yi?
Lin Yi (lowering spear at Chey): Shut up! Keep moving.

(They continue waling, fade to the same scene, but apparently some time later. It is still night. Down the hill, though, there is a little lean to shack.)

Lin Yi: Go on. He sees you only.
Chey: Oh that's okay, we can chat later.
Aang: Is that where Jeong Jeong is? I need to talk to him right away.

(Aang begins to move forward, but it stopped by a spear shaft across his path.)

Lin Yi: No! You wait there. (Pushing Chey forward roughly) Go now!
Chey: Don't worry! Everything'll be fine. He's a great man, great man!

(Chey walks toward Jeong Jeong's, the cut back to the Fire Nation town the kids just visited. Shift to the now deserted central square of the town where some local guards are being interrogated by Admiral Zhao who is flanked by a few guards.)

Zhao: So, the Avatar was here and you let slip away?
Officer: Yes, sir, but other than that the festival went off without a hitch! (A huge piece of burning walls falls in the background with a massive crash.) No fights. Theft was way down.
Zhao: I don't care about your local crime rates! Which way did they go?
Officer (pointing): They headed into the forest, up the river I suspect.
Zhao (to his guards, who turn to obey): Ready the river boats. We're going after the Avatar.

(Cut back to Chey exiting Jeong Jeong's hut. He arrives back where Aang and the others are sleeping. Aang wakes up instantly as Chey approaches.)

Aang: What happened? Can I see Jeong Jeong now?
Chey (sitting down glumly): He won't see you. He's very angry that I brought you here. He wants you to leave immediately.
Sokka (getting up on his elbows): Finally! Let's hit the road. (He stretches back out again.)
Aang: Why won't he see me?
Chey: He says you're not ready. Says you haven't mastered waterbending and earthbending yet.
Aang: Wait, how does he know that?
Chey: He saw the way you walked into camp. He can tell.
Aang: I'm going in anyway!

(Aang walks over to the entrance to Jeong Jeong's hut. He takes a deep breath, parts the curtain, and walks into the darkness. Cut to a dark figure seated cross legged amidst a semicircle of candles, his back to Aang.)

Jeong Jeong: Get out.
Aang: Master, I need to learn firebending.
Jeong Jeong: Only a fool seeks his own destruction.
Aang (sitting down): I'm the Avatar. It's my destiny to...
Jeong Jeong: Destiny? What would a boy know of destiny? If a fish lives its whole life in this river, does he know the river's destiny? No! Only that it runs on and on out of his control! He may follow where it flows, but he cannot see the end. He cannot imagine the ocean.
Aang: Ookay, but it's the Avatar's duty to master all of the bending disciplines.
Jeong Jeong: To master the bending disciplines, you must first master discipline itself. But you have no interest in this, so I have no interest in you! Now, get out.
Aang: Please, I have to learn. This could be my only chance.
Jeong Jeong (turning around to face Aang in anger): Are you deaf! How can I teach you if you refuse to listen? Before learning firebending you must learn water and earth. Water is cool and soothing, earth is steady and stable, but fire, fire is alive! It breathes, it grows, without a bender, a rock will not throw itself! But fire will spread and destroy everything in its path if one does not have the will to control it! That is its destiny! You are not ready! You are too weak!

(At this final pronouncement the candles flame up around Jeong Jeong to illuminate the entire tent. When the flames go out, the screen is black. Then, a vision for Jeong Jeong begins, as one candle is seen lit in front of Jeong Jeong. The other candles have disappeared. Instead of the tent, a tree is in the background behind the Deserter. In front of him, stands Avatar Roku.)

Avatar Roku: You think I am weak?
Jeong Jeong: Avatar Roku! No! No! (inclining his head in respect) I did not mean that!
Avatar Roku: I have mastered the elements a thousand times in a thousand lifetimes. Now, I must do it once again. You will teach the Avatar firebending.

(At this final statement, cut to a wide shot of the two. Roku raises his left hand and the tree behind Jeong Jeong bursts into flame. Cut to a close of Jeong Jeong as the vision ends.)

Jeong Jeong (coming out of his trance): Yes, yes, I will teach you.
Aang: Really? That's great!
Jeong Jeong (looking at Aang's enormous, cheesy smile): Ughhhhh.

(Cut to a morning scene outside of Jeong Jeong's hut. Sokka is sitting on a boulder by the river, fishing. The screen pans up the river where Katara is practicing waterbending and then to Aang and Jeong Jeong in front of the hut. Aang stands, bandy legged, on a flat stone in the river. Jeong Jeong stands a foot or two away on the bank in front of his hut.)

Jeong Jeong: Widen your stance. (Aang complies.) Wider! Bend your knees. Now, concentrate. (Aang takes on an expression of concentration.) Good, good!
Aang (as Jeong Jeong begins to walk away): Wait! What do I do now?
Jeong Jeong (whipping around, Katara and Sokka visible in the background): Silence! Talking is not concentrating! Look at your friend, is she talking? (Then, pointing to Sokka) Even that oaf knows to concentrate on what he's doing!
Sokka (from afar): Hey!
Aang: But what am I concentrating on?
Jeong Jeong: Feel the heat of the sun. It is the greatest source of fire. Yet, it is in complete balance with nature!
Aang (looking at the sun then turning back to Jeong Jeong, a large smile on his face): So when do I get to make some fire?
Jeong Jeong: Concentrate!

(Aang breathes deeply, and then flushes in embarrassment as he hears his friends laughing at him from behind. He turns to look at them, but they stop instantly, trying in vain to look innocent. Cut to a long shot of the figures in the distance climbing the slope of a mountain. Cut to a close up shot of Aang and his master walking up the path to the mountain's summit.)

Aang: Are we coming up here so I don't burn anything with my fire blasts?
Jeong Jeong: No fire yet.
Aang (clearly disappointed and impatient): What?

(Cut to both of them standing atop the mountain, the shot zooming backward to show the surrounding countryside.)

Jeong Jeong: Power in firebending comes from the breath. That is why you must master proper breath control.
Aang: You brought me up here to breathe?
Jeong Jeong: Assume your stance.

(Jeong Jeong turns away from him to look o.c. as Aang complies.)

Jeong Jeong: Wider.
Aang: You're not even look...
Jeong Jeong: Wider! Now, inhale through the nose and exhale through the mouth - without talking. (Aang obeys.) Good. Keep going.

(The firebending master walks down the path and out of the frame as Aang continues to practice, a look of fierce concentration on his face. Then cut to a view of Aang's lower body as he parts the curtain into Jeong Jeong's candle lit hut and enters.)

Jeong Jeong (from o.c.): What are you doing here!? I did not tell you to stop!
Aang: I've been breathing for hours.
Jeong Jeong: You want to stop breathing?
Aang (angrily throwing his hands wide in a gesture of frustration): I want you to stop wasting my time! I already know how to squat and breathe and feel the sun. (Here he makes semi-disrespectful gestures mimicking each of the activities that Jeong Jeong has insisted he practice.) I want to know how to shoot fire out of my fingertips!
Jeong Jeong (lowering his head): Ughhhh. I had a pupil once who had no interest in learning discipline. He was only concerned with the power of fire - how he could use it to destroy his opponents and wipe out the obstacles in his path., but fire is a horrible burden to bear. Its nature is to consume and without control it destroys everything around it.

(During Jeong Jeong's monologue, the view cuts to a shot sequence of Zhao and his men moving up the river on their boats. They are attacked by some of Jeong Jeong's rebels, but Zhao wipes them out with a wall of flame and a cruel smile. As the boat travel upstream, the forest fire that Zhao has just started rages freely in the background. It is clear that Zhao was Jeong Jeong's undisciplined former student. Fade back to Jeong Jeong pouring himself some tea.)

Jeong Jeong: Learn restraint, or risk destroying yourself and everything you love.

(Aang exits the tent. Fade to sometime later, where Jeong Jeong exits his hut to stand in front of Aang, whose head is lowered. The Avatar sits in repose on the stone near the river bank in front of the hut. Leaves fall around them.)

Aang: I thought about what you said. I promise I'll be more patient.
Jeong Jeong: We're going to work with fire now.
Aang: Oh yeh!

(Aang immediately explodes in excitement and happy music plays. He airbends himself in a few quick loops in the air, then freezes, remembering his promise. He lands back on the stone, puts his hands behind his back and assumes a serious expression.)

Aang: I mean, let us begin.

(Cut to closer shot of Jeong Jeong who catches one of the falling leaves in his left hand. He holds it between his thumb and forefinger. He begins to burn a tiny hole in it at the point of contact.)

Jeong Jeong: Concentrate on the fire. I want you to keep this flame from reaching the edges of the leaf for as long as you can.

(The hole is spreading with the flame even as Aang assumes his stance and begins to concentrate. Suddenly the shot widens to show that a rebel guard has approached the pair.)

Rebel: Master! There is trouble.
Aang: What's going on?
Jeong Jeong (leaving with guard): Concentrate on your leaf.

(Cut to Aang's face in the foreground, Katara in the background by the river's edge nearby.)

Aang (petulantly): This is the worst firebending instruction ever. All he does is leave me alone for hours to concentrate or breathe.
Katara: I'm sure there's a good reason.
Aang: But I'm ready to do so much more.

(Suddenly Aang's face lights up with an idea. Cut to his legs, where he widens his stance, then cut to his upper body, where he begins to breathe. He still holds the leaf, which begins to smoke. Suddenly, the leaf bursts into flame and disintegrates. Aang is now holding a fireball in his hand.)

Aang: I did it! I made fire!
Katara (coming closer): Aang, that's great, but you should take it slow.

(Aang's expression gets annoyed at this comment, and the flame instantly gets bigger. He and Katara are surprised.)

Katara: Careful!

(Aang retains control and reduces the flame to its former size, but not before almost falling into the river.)

Aang: Now that's firebending!

(Aang then shoots a whip of flame o.c., and then begins to juggle his ball of flame happily.)

Katara: Aang, you'll hurt yourself!
Aang (continuing to play): Wonder how that juggler did it?

(Aang loops the ball around him. It begins a complete circle around him and he pushes it outward. The shockwave of flame engulfs Katara and burns her hands which she has raised to protect her face. She cries out in pain. Cut to a shot from behind Katara who has crumpled to her knees, hands wrapped around her.)

Aang: Katara! (He hops over to her as she cries pitifully) I'm so sorry!
Sokka (rushing into the frame): Katara, what's wrong!? (To Aang, angrily) What did you do?
Aang: Iiiit was an accident! I was... Katara, I'm so -

(Sokka cuts him off as he grabs Aang and tackles him to the ground just as Aang tried to put a hand on Katara's shoulder.)

Sokka: I told you we shouldn't mess around with this! Look what you did! You burned my sister!

(Katara gets up and runs away. Cut to Aang who looks on, stunned, as she exits. Fade to commercial break.)



Act III

(Opening shot of Aang still lying on the grass of the river bank where Sokka tackled him. He looks o.c., a scared and lost look on his face. Cut to wider shot of Sokka standing over him, still very angry.)

Sokka: You burned my sister! (Shot widens more to show Jeong Jeong has returned. Then, to Jeong Jeong) This is all your fault!
Jeong Jeong: I know. Now pack your things. You must leave immediately.
Aang: I'm sorry, I didn't... (Sokka walks away) I'm sorry!

(Aang looks up at Jeong Jeong who has walked over to him. He looks implacable. He turns and walks away leaving Aang alone. Shift to a late afternoon shot of the hills, then cut to Katara crying by the river bank. She looks at her hands, they are burned. She puts them in the water. The pain intensifies, then she feels some relief. Her eyes open in surprise as she looks down. Her hands glow white underneath the water. She raises them out and they stop glowing. The burns are gone. She looks at her hands in amazement.)

Jeong Jeong (from o.c.): You have healing abilities. (She turns to see Jeong Jeong approaching from behind.) The great benders of the water tribe sometimes have this ability. (He sits next to her) I've always wished I were blessed like you - free from this burning curse.
Katara: But you're a great master. You have powers I'll never know.
Jeong Jeong: Water brings healing and life. But fire brings only destruction and pain. It forces those of us burdened with its care to walk a razor's edge between humanity and savagery. Eventually, we are torn apart.

(Suddenly the water is front of them is blasted with gouts of flame. Jeong Jeong rises quickly to a defensive bending stance and breaks the flames that wash over him and Katara. Cut to a frontal shot of Zhao's riverboats bearing down on them, then cut back to Katara and the firebending master.)

Jeong Jeong: Go get your friends and flee! (She complies.) Do not come back here or you will all be destroyed. Hurry!

(Jeong Jeong turns back to face the boats which are shooting fireballs at him. They land harmlessly all around him. Cut to Zhao looking ahead through a telescope from the main deck of his ship. He lowers it and smiles. Cut back to Jeong Jeong who, with a few powerful motions, produces an awesome wall of fire perhaps a hundred feet across the entire river in front of the ships. Cut to overhead shot of the ships, which turn to starboard and move to land on the nearby beach. Cut to the water in front of the beach. Zhao drops down into view.)

Zhao: Don't worry, men. My old teacher gave up fighting a long time ago.

(Cut to Jeong Jeong behind the wall of fire. Suddenly, Zhao parts the wall just enough for him to walk through.)

Zhao: Master Jeong Jeong.

(Cut to a close of Jeong Jeong's face, then a wide shot as he drops the wall of fire. Then cut to Katara running up to where Sokka is preparing Appa to leave. He turns to his sister.)

Sokka: Katara! Are you all right?
Katara: I'm fine, we've got to get out of here. Where's Aang?

(Sokka thumbs in the direction of the hut. Cut to Katara running down the hill path to Jeong Jeong's hut. It is clear now that Jeong Jeong's hut rests on a little island in the river and is approachable by a small foot bridge. Cut to Katara entering the hut through the curtain. Inside, Aang sits amidst the candles, back to the entrance.)

Aang: Jeong Jeong tried to tell me that I wasn't ready. I wouldn't listen. I'm never going to firebend again.
Katara: You'll have to eventually.
Aang: No, never again.
Katara: It's okay, Aang. I'm healed.
Aang: What? How?
Katara: I'll explain later. But right now, we have to get out here. Zhao and his soldiers are attacking!
Aang (airbending himself to his feet): Where?
Katara: By the river. They captured Jeong Jeong.
Aang (running out of the hut): I have to help him!

(Shift to an overhead shot of the beach. Zhao and his men stand against the lone Master, then cut to a closer shot.)

Zhao: Look at you. You were once so great. I can't believe my former master has become nothing more than a simple savage.
Jeong Jeong: It is you who have embraced savagery, Zhao.
Zhao: It's Admiral Zhao, now.
Jeong Jeong: That title will not help you against the Avatar. Do not try to fight him! You are no match!
Zhao (laughing): I think I can handle a child.
Jeong Jeong: I have never seen such raw power.
Aang (from o.c. ): Jeong Jeong!
Zhao: We'll see. Men! Take the deserter!

(Cut to overhead shot of Jeong Jeong surrounded by five of Jeong Jeong's spearmen. Aang tops short in horror as they close in. Jeong Jeong smiles and wraps himself in a massive bal of flame. When it dissipates, he is gone.)

Zhao (angrily): It's a trick! He's run off into the woods. Find him! (Turning to Aang.) Let's find out what my old master has taught you.
Aang: YOU were Jeong Jeong's student?
Zhao: Until I got bored.

(He launches a fireball at Aang, who dodges that and another.)

Zhao: I see he taught you how to duck and run like a coward. But I doubt he showed you what a firebender is truly capable of!

(He launches another fireball at Aang. It flies over Aang's head as the Avatar produces a flat, spinning whirlwind of air underneath him and balances himself on top of it with one finger.)

Aang: Whoa! Wild shot!
Zhao: I'll show you wild!

(He fires several more volleys which Aang either dodges or breaks with airbending. Zhao's blasts have torched much of the surrounding forest and the sky fills with smoke.)

Aang (to himself): No self control...

(Cut to Aang's p.o.v., he looks over at the boats then back at Zhao.)

Zhao: Stand and fight, Avatar!
Aang: Oh, were we fighting? I thought you were just getting warmed up.
Zhao: I was!

(He fires many more volleys, all of which miss.)

Aang: Is that all you got? Man, they'll make anyone an admiral these days!

(Zhao launches another errant fire blast with a dreadful noise of frustration. Aang airbends himself up onto one of the ships.)

Aang: Ahoy! (Sticking his butt out at the admiral and wiggling it suggestively) I'm Admiral Zhao!

(Cut to Zhao who looks angry and then makes another noise of frustration. He jump up onto the main deck and launches a blast of fire. It sets the bridge on fire, but Aang jumps off unharmed to the aft section. He jumps the aft section of the next ship.)

Aang: I don't know why, but I thought you'd be better than Zuko.

(Aang looks disappointed when he says this and hangs his arms by his sides, letting them dangle. His eyes go wide and he falls flat on the deck fast, though, as wall of fire passes over him. Cut to a view of the second ship guard railing. Zhao is visible through it on the deck of the first ship. He has just blasted a hole through the guard rail of both ships with the wall of fire Aang just avoided.)

Aang: Sloppy. Very sloppy.

(Crying in frustration, Zhao follows Aang around the boats, spreading fire to each of them in his vain effort to get Aang. Momentarily out of Zhao's sights, Aang hides behind one of the deck cabins. Zhao lands behind him, however, having jumped down from the top of the deck cabin. Aang turns to face him.)

Zhao: No wonder to run now, you little smart mouth!

(He launches a fire bolt, which Aang dodges by flipping over Zhao's head to land behind him. The bridge of the third and last ship is now on fire.)

Aang: You've lost this battle.

(Aang airbends himself into the air as Zhao sets fire to the third ship's prow.)

Zhao: Are you crazy? You haven't thrown a single blow!
Aang (motioning to his left): No, but you have.

(Zhao looks to his left and grimaces. Cut to wide, overhead shot of the three ships on fire. The first is now sinking fast into the river.)

Aang: Jeong Jeong said you had no restraint.

(Aang hops off the prow of the third ship. Cut back to Zhao who screams in frustration, the shift back wide shot of the two remaining ships which continue to burn. Cut back to a close up shot of the river. Aang breaks the surface of the water and, cupping his hand to his mouth, shouts o.c.)

Aang: Have a nice walk home!
Sokka (from o.c. : Aang, come on!

(Cut a shot from behind Aang, who is now looking at the river bank beach. Appa is there with the others on his back. Aang runs over, hops on Appa and they take off. Cut to Aang in Appa's driver's seat.)

Aang: Wait! Where's Jeong Jeong?
Sokka: He disappeared. They all did.

(Cut to sliding overhead shot of Jeong Jeong's now empty compound, then cut to Chey walking along the forest path approach to the compound.)

Chey: Hey, where did everybody go? Very funny guys!

(Camera zooms backward into a long, overhead shot of Chey, before cutting to Zhao standing waist deep in the river watching his ships burn. Cut to a close of his chagrined face before he lowers his gaze. Switch to side shot of Appa flying through the clouds around sunset. Cut to a closer shot of the kids in Appa's saddle.)

Katara: Aang, you're burned.

(He looks down in wonder to see that she is right. His sleeves are torn open and there are burn marks.)

Katara: Let me help you.

(She opens her water bottle and wraps some water around her hand. It glows white again. She places it over the burned area , breathes and concentrates. When she lets go the wound is healed.)

Aang: Wow! That's good water.
Sokka: When did you learn how to do that?
Katara (shrugging): I guess I always knew.
Sokka: Oh... well then thanks for all the first aid over the years. Like when I fell into the grease briar bramble and that time I had two fish hooks in my thumb!
Aang: Two?
Katara: He tried to get the first fish hook out with another fish hook.

(Cut to Appa flying them through the late afternoon sky. Sokka continues.)

Sokka: Oh, and the time that big snake bit me! Thanks for healing that up. That was great. Really helpful.

(Fade to white as Appa disappears into the horizon.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Opening shot of the roof of a building, screen pans up to reveal a small group of people seated on benches. It is night. Aang, Katara and Sokka sit on the first bench to the left. Some children kneel on the ground in front of the benches. They are all listening to a man sitting in front of the fire that burns in the center of the gathering.)

Storyteller (from o.c. at first as the camera pans up): So travelers, the next time you think you hear a strange large bird talking, take a closer look, it might not be a giant parrot, but a flying man! A member of a secret group of air walkers who laugh at gravity and laugh at those bound to the earth by it!

(Cut to Aang, smiling.)

Aang: Aren't airbender stories the best?
Katara: Was it realistic? Was that how it was back then?
Aang: I laugh at gravity all the time. Haha! Gravity.

(Cut to a wider shot of the three on the bench. Suddenly a pair of hands holding an open hat appear in front of Sokka. The hands shake the hat and the jungle of coins is heard.)

Storyteller: Jingle, jingle!

(Sokka searches his coast, but when he opens his hands there is only some lint and a bug. The bugs legs wiggle a few times, accompanied by a sound effect. Cut to wide shot of the three seated on the log, the storyteller in front of them.)

Sokka: Sorry!
Storyteller: Aww. Cheapskates!

(Aang runs over to the storyteller who is facing another audience member as he seeks more donations.)

Aang: Hey thanks for the story!
Storyteller (thrusting hat at Aang without looking at him): Tell it to the cap, boy!

(A copper piece falls on the ground, which Momo picks up and deposits in the cap. The storyteller pats Momo.)

Storyteller: Aw, much obliged little bat thing!
Aang (Momo climbing back up to his shoulder): It means a lot to hear airbender stories. It must have been hundred years ago your great grandpa met them.
Storyteller: What are you prattling about child? Great grand-pappy saw the air walkers last week!

(View slides over to a very old man who waves at Aang.)

Great Grand-Pappy: Heya!

(Cut to a daytime sky shot of clouds rushing by. The camera pans up to reveal Appa's underside, the sun above him as he flies. Cut to a side view as Appa flies just above puffy white clouds, snow capped mountains in the distance.)

Aang: Hey, we're almost at the Northern Air Temple! This is where they had the championships for sky bison polo.
Katara (sitting down next to Sokka): Do you think we'll really find airbenders?
Sokka (whittling): You want me to be like you, or totally honest?
Katara (folding her arms): Are you saying I'm a liar?
Sokka: I'm saying you're an optimist. Same thing basically.

(Cut to Aang, looking ahead and smiling.)

Aang: Hey guys, look at this!

(Cut to shot just near Appa, who flies them all away from the camera towards what is obviously the Northern Air Temple. It sits atop a sheer peak similar to its sister temple down south. Unlike that temple, however, there are people or things flying around this one. Cut to a closer shot of the temple. Smoke rises in lazy pillars from a couple places among the spires. Around the temple fly many gliders. Cut back to Aang, Katara in the background. Aang's smile turns to a slight frown.)

Katara: Huh! They really are airbenders!
Aang (leaning back and folding his arms unhappily): No, they're not.
Sokka (appearing in the far background with Momo and pointing ahead): What do you mean they're not? Those guys are flying!
Aang (from o.c. as the camera returns to a shot of the temple and its gliders): Gliding maybe, but not flying. You can tell by the way they move. They're not airbending. Those people have no spirit.

(As he finishes, Katara and Sokka almost get their heads taken off by a glider as it passes over their heads. The glider pilot laughs. Cut to a close up of the glider. A teenage boy wearing amber goggles and seated in a glider built out of a wheelchair laughs and wheels his craft around for another pass at Appa. Cut back to the kids.)

Katara (pointing to the glider): I don't know, Aang. That kid seems pretty spirited!

(The wheelchair glider makes another pass. Aang looks at him and gets a competitive look on his face. He jumps into the air, unfolds his glider and takes off. The other gliders now fly in formation around Appa. Katara falls backward, crashing into Sokka.)

Sokka: We better find some solid ground before it finds us!

(Cut to Appa landing gracefully on one of the temple's outer terraces. Then cut back to the boy glider, still laughing. He soars upward, Aang coming into the frame beneath him, an unhappy expression on his face. Aang flies upward as well and comes up just behind the his target. Shift to an overhead shot of some Air Temple residents watching the game of "tag" going on in the sky from the terrace where Appa landed.)

Audience Member: Go Teo! Show that bald kid how it's done!

(Back in the sky, Aang continues the pursuit. Teo hits his brakes, loops backwards and ends us behind Aang. They twirl around each other in a controlled dive. Cut to a side view where it is clear that the gliders are neck and neck with each other.)

Teo: Hey there! You're pretty good.
Aang: Yeh, I know. But I can do more than fancy gliding!

(Aang breaks his descent, turns and shoots straight upward. He comes back to the one of temple's towers, let's go of his glider, and starts running along the side of the tower. Then he produces an air scooter, jumps on it and rides it along the outside wall of the tower, his glider still running along side of him. He lets the air scooter die and then jumps back on his glider and soars back into the sky. Cut back to Teo, who is impressed.)

Teo: Wow! I don't think I can do that! But here's a good one...

(He releases a cord on his glider and a cylinder on the back of his glider begins to leave a trail of thick grey smoke. Teo manipulates his glider through loops and arcs, leaving the grey trail behind him. Cut to a view from the audience down on the Air Temple terrace. Teo has made a picture of Aang's face, arrow and all, with a sour expression. The crowd laughs. Cut back to Aang on his glider, Teo coming up beside him.)

Teo: What do you think?
Aang (clearly not enthused): It's great.

(Aang lands next to Katara and Sokka, folding his glider. Teo lands his glider right behind, skidding only a bit before he applies his hand break and come to a stop. A bunch of kids come up and detach the glider from his wheelchair. He then wheels over to Aang and his friends.)

Teo: Hey! You're a REAL airbender! You must be the Avatar! That's amazing! I, I, I've heard stories about you.
Aang (looking embarrassed but happy): Thanks.
Sokka: Wow! This glider chair is incredible!

(Two girls bring the glider setup back for Sokka to inspect.)

Teo: If you think this is good, wait until you see the other stuff my Dad designed.

(He begins to wheel away, Sokka and the others following. Cut to an overhead shot of the three moving with their new friend through the huge main gate of the temple. Cut to a view from inside the entrance as the walk in. When they reach the main chamber, it is quite unlike that seen in "The Southern Air Temple." This room is dominated by a jumble of steam-powered machinery with many wheels, gears and pipes. It is not pretty. A beautiful statue of an airbender monk (who looks somewhat like Gyatso) is seen in a recessed portico in the wall, but it too seems dirty and befouled as does the rest of the room. Shafts of sunlight do filter in, but the steam and dust make it look shadowy.)

Sokka (running forward): Wow!
Teo (proudly): Yeh, my Dad is the mastermind behind this whole place! Everything's powered by hot air. It even pumps hot air currents outside to give us a lift when we're gliding.

(As he speaks a woman walks over to cage which she gets into. She pulls a rope and steam power lifts the cage up to a higher level where she exits.)

Aang: This place is unbelievable.
Teo: Yeh, it's great isn't it?
Aang: No, just unbelievable.

(Aang's walks out of the frame, clearly saddened by what he has seen.)

Katara: Aang used to come here a long time ago. I think he's a little shocked it's so... different.
Sokka: So better!

(Cut to Katara walking over to Aang in another part of the room. The Avatar is looking at a mural. Cut to the mural. It was surely once breathtakingly beautiful. Now, it is gritty and dirty. Worse, many of the figures and shapes in the mural have been destroyed since many pipes now and enter and exit the wall here.)

Aang (sadly from o.c. as the camera pans the mural): This is supposed to be the history of my people.

(Katara walks over and puts a hand on his shoulder, but he walks away over to a huge statue that once had a fountain attached to it. Now the fountain basin is full of green industrial looking effluence that bubbles and spirits. The statue then emits a cloud of black smoke from its mouth, scaring Aang. Katara comes up behind him.)

Aang (as the smoke erupts from the statue): Ugh!
Katara: I'm sure some parts of the temple are still the same.

(Fade to some time later where we see a long shot of the kids and Teo walking across a narrow, suspended pathway from the main temple to a satellite temple building. Cut the four now inside the satellite building. They are in the main courtyard, which looks untouched. Airbender statues still reside here.)

Aang: It's nice to see even one part of the temple that isn't ruined.

(Cut to Aang and Katara staring up at a huge recessed statue of an airbender monk. Suddenly, from o.c.)

Voice: Look out!

(The statue disintegrates as a wrecking ball smashes through it. Aang and Katara fall backward with flying debris and dust. Everyone coughs. As the dust settles, many figures can be seen through the hole the wrecking ball just created. One of them walks forward, a middle aged man with a bald head and weird, patches of pointy hair on either side of his head. His right eye has a red monocle. He wears a green tunic mostly covered by the white smock or apron of an artisan.)

The Mechanist: What the doodle! Don't you know enough to stay away from construction sites? We have to make room for the bathhouse!
Aang (assuming an airbending stance): Do you know what you did? You just destroyed something sacred! For a stupid bathhouse!
The Mechanist (waving a hand in front of nose suggestively): Well, people around here are starting to stink.
Aang (pointing at the Mechanist): This whole place stinks!

(Aang strikes the ground with his staff, sending a gale back through the hole in the wall. Cut to a long shot of the outside of the satellite temple building. The wrecking ball and its entire rig are blown off the building's rock foundation and falls into the crevices below. Cut to a shot from underneath the falling rig, where the rig seems to fall right into the camera. Fade to commercial break.)



Act II

(When the show returns, a brief opening shot of the temple's exterior, festooned with smoke, is replaced by a return to Aang's showdown with the Mechanist.)

Aang: This is a sacred temple! You can't treat it this way. I've seen it when the monks were here. I know what it's supposed to be like.
The Mechanist: The monks? But you're 12!
Teo: Dad, he's the Avatar. He used to come here a hundred years ago.
Aang (advancing on the Mechanist with each question): What are you doing? Who said you could be here?
The Mechanist (turning away): Hmmm... doing here... A long time ago, but not a hundred years, my people became refugees after a terrible flood (he gestures for effect to show the size of the flood, then stands behind his son's wheelchair). My infant son, Teo, was badly hurt and lost his mother. (Sniffling to hold back tears) I needed somewhere to rebuild and I stumbled across this place. Couldn't believe it! Everywhere pictures of flying people. But empty! Nobody home! Then I came across these fan like contraptions!

(He puts his hands out and extends his arms as if they were wings and makes flying motions across the courtyard for emphasis. He stops in front of Aang, who still looks angry.)

Aang: Our gliders.
The Mechanist: Yes, little light flying machines. They gave me an idea. Build a new life for my son, in the air! Then everyone would be on equal ground, so to speak! We're just in the process of improving upon what's already here and after all, isn't that what nature does?

(Cut back to Aang, still unhappy. His friends are teary eyed behind him at the Mechanist's story.)

Aang: Nature knows where to stop.
The Mechanist (looking through the hole in the wall he just created): I suppose that's true. Unfortunately, progress has a way of getting away from us. (He looks down in some sadness, then lifts his head back up to look at something o.c.) Look at the time!

(Cut to a view of a three candles burning brightly on a stone pedestal. Each of the three candles is separated neatly into different sections. Next to the pedestal a large mallet rests, head down. Then cut back to the Mechanist turning to speak to a scribe behind him.)

The Mechanist: Come the pulley system must be oiled before dark.
Sokka (approaching the candles): Wait, how can you tell the time from that thing? The notches all look the same.
The Mechanist: The candle will tell us. Watch.

(The candle flame snaps four times in a row.)

Sokka: You put spark powder in the candle!
The Mechanist: Four flashes, so it's exactly four hours past midday, or, as I call it, four o'candle!

(Sokka laughs. Cut to a frontal shot of the Mechanist, pleased that Sokka is interested.)

The Mechanist: If you like that, wait till you see my finger safe knife sharpener! (He holds up his left hand. Three of the fingers are made of wood. He detaches them and tosses them to Sokka.) Only took me three tries to get it right!
Sokka (after catching the fingers): Aaahhh!
The Mechanist: Follow me!

(Sokka and the others run after The Mechanist, leaving Katara, Aang and Teo alone.)

Teo: Hey Aang, I want to show you something.

(Fade to a long, overhead shot of the three walking deep in the bowels of the Air Temple.)

Aang: I just can't get over it. There's not a single thing that's the same.
Teo (stopping and scooping up a little black and white striped hermit crab): I don't know about that. The Temple might be different, but the creatures that live here are probably direct descendents of the ones that lived here a long time ago.
Katara: You're right. They're kind of keepers of the temples origins.

(Teo gave the crab to Katara, who now passes it to Aang. He smiles.)

Teo (from o.c.): Besides, there's one part of the temple that hasn't changed at all.

(Fade to the group walking down a long corridor of the Temple. Huge Air Nomad swirls are built into mosaics in the floor. Camera pans down to where they all stand in front of a door. Then cut to a view from behind the three showing a clear shot of the door. It is huge, made of wood, and it is dominated in the center by a woodcut comprised of three wooden air symbols protruding from its surface and which are arranged in a triangular pattern. The symbols are attached to tubes that end in two horns near the bottom of the woodcut.)

Katara: Hey! It's just like the one in the other Air Temple.
Teo: Only an airbender can open it – so inside it's completely untouched, just the way the monks left it. I've always wondered what it was like in there.
Katara: Aang?
Aang (lowering his head): I'm sorry, this is the last part of temple that the same as it was. I want it to stay that way.
Teo: I completely understand. I just wanted you to know it was here.
Aang: Thanks.

(Aang turns and starts walking back down the hall the way they had come. Cut to a brief exterior shot of temple, followed by a shot of Sokka and the Mechanist walking down a dark, narrow stone staircase. They hold lanterns that glow light blue, but don't put out much light.)

Sokka: These lanterns are terrible! I can't see.

(He stops and opens one. Inside the jar is packed with fireflies. One escapes.)

Sokka: Why would you want to use fireflies for light?
The Mechanist: Hey! Close that up! They'll get loose. Fireflies are a non-flammable light source.

(They continue, coming to a door whose edges are blocked with some kind of caulk. The Mechanist feels around the caulk-like insulation, looking for leaks. He turns to Sokka.)

The Mechanist: Cover your nose and hold your breath.

(Cut to a black screen. Suddenly a panel slides open and we see Sokka and the Mechanist's eyes looking into the camera.)

Sokka: Okay, so you brought me all the way down here to see an empty room.
The Mechanist: Wrong.

(The panel slides again, cut back to the two on the other side of the door.)

The Mechanist: It's filled to the brim with natural gas. Came across it my first time here. Unfortunately, I was carrying a torch at the time. Nearly blew myself and the whole place even more sky high. (Screen pans up to show his scraggly eyebrows) Thought my eyebrows would never grow back! Anyway, there's a vital problem that needs solving. From time to time we have gas leaks and they're nearly impossible to find.
Sokka (checking his part of the door for leaks): So this place is an explosion waiting to happen?
The Mechanist: Yes, until I figure out how to locate something I can't see, hear, smell or touch.

(Cut to an exterior shot with gliders flying through the sky. The screen begins to pan down.)

Teo (from o.c.): The wind will carry you. It supports something inside you – something even lighter than air, and that something takes over when you fly.

(When the screen rests, Katara stands at the edge of the terrace, holding a glider with both hands. Teo is to her left, Aang behind her to the right with Momo. She leans the glider on its side.)

Katara (looking over the side of the terrace in fear): I've changed my mind. I think I was born without that something.
Teo (laughing): Impossible! Everybody has it.
Aang (from o.c.): Spirit.

(Cut to a wider shot of the three.)

Teo: What?
Aang: That's the something you're talking about.
Teo: Yeh, I suppose it is.

(Cut to a panning overhead shot of the terrace area. It rests on the three from a spot maybe a hundred feet overhead. Katara is now ready for takeoff, Teo ready behind her.)

Teo: Are you ready?
Katara: No!

(She jumps off anyway and screams on her way down, Teo behind her. Her screams turn to delight, however and she gains control of the craft and begins to fly, Teo right with her. Cut to a shot of Katara gliding, the Temple in the background. Aang glides into the shot.)

Katara: I can't believe I'm flying!
Aang: Just make sure to keep your mouth closed so you don't swallow a bug!

(Cut to a close up Momo flying beside her, the air in his area sparsely populated with bugs. He opens his mouth and eats one.)

Katara: Teo was right about the air! All I had to do was trust it. Let it carry me.
Aang: Even though Teo's not an airbender, he really does have the spirit of one.

(Cut to a long shot of Teo back on the terrace, his glider detached and off to the slide. Aang glides in and folds up his glider.)

Aang: I've been thinking. If you wanna see what's in that room, I'd be happy to open the door for you.
Teo: Great!
Katara (her voice echoing from o.c.): Wait! How do I land this thing? What if I land (swallows bug) – eh! Blech! Yech! Bug! Bug! That was a bug!

(Cut to a quick exterior shot of the Temple, then to the Mechanist's workshop. He bends over some plans on his desk while Sokka knocks over some junk in the background.)

The Mechanist: I said don't touch anything! (Sokka loses control of the stuff he is trying to stop from hitting the ground and the junk falls all over the floor.) Oh, don't worry, that experiments old and that egg was just part of last week's lunch.
Sokka (sniffing the air): Ugh! Week old egg smell!
The Mechanist: Quick! Find that egg!

(Both begin crawling on their hands and knees to find the egg. Cut to Aang, Katara and Teo at the Temple door once again.)

Teo: I can't believe I'm finally going to see what's inside.

(Aang then airbends two jets of air, one from each arm, into the horns at the bottom of the woodcut. The air runs through the tubes and one by one flips the air symbols from the blue sides which had been showing, to the maroon sides which had been facing the interior of the temple. As each turns, it flips another mechanism on the outside of a door, clearly all three of the symbols had to trigger each of their mechanisms in order to unlock the Temple door. Cut back to Sokka and The Mechanist's search for the egg.)

Sokka: How could something that's so small you can't even see it make such a big stink!
The Mechanist (getting an idea): That's the solution to our problem!
Sokka: Yeh!

(The both crawl around to face each other, forgetting to stand up in their excitement.)

Sokka: If we put a whole mess of rotten eggs in the cellar where the gas seeps up...
The Mechanist: The gas will mix with the smell of rotten eggs...
Sokka: Then, if there's a leak...
The Mechanist: You smell rotten eggs! Then you just follow your nose to the place where the smell is coming from...
Sokka: And plug up the hole where the gas is escaping!
Both: You're a genius!

(Suddenly a large bell starts ringing.)

The Mechanist (getting up and running): Something's wrong I've got to go.

(Cut to a shot from inside the Air Temple sanctuary as the doors open, revealing Aang, Katara and Teo. They walk in and are horrified. Cut to a myriad of shots of the interior of the Temple sanctuary. It is filled with evil looking war machines and torture devices. The camera affords a zoom in close up shot of Aang's face.)

Aang: This is a nightmare.
The Mechanist (entering behind them): You don't understand.
Aang (turning and pointing a finger at him in anger): You're making weapons for the Fire Nation!

(Cut to a zooming close up of the the Mechanist, Sokka behind him. Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(Shot opens with an overhead shot panning down. Cut to a close up of the Mechanist, Sokka over his shoulder behind him.)

Sokka (angry): You make weapons for the Fire Nation!?

(The Mechanist looks down in humiliation. Cut to Teo and Aang.)

Teo: Explain all this! Now!
The Mechanist: It was about a year after we moved here. Fire Nation soldiers found our settlement. You were too young to remember this tale. They were going to destroy everything, burn it to the ground. I pleaded with them, I begged them to spare us. They asked what I had to offer. I offered... my services. You must understand, I did this for you!

(Teo turns his head and his wheelchair away. The Mechanist turns and walks back down the hall. Fade to the Mechanist back in his office. He is playing with a balloon driven by a candle in a basket below it. There are two eggs in the basket with happy faces on them. He lets the balloon go and it rises toward the ceiling. Behind him the door is heard opening. Cut to Aang and Teo in the doorway.)

Aang: When are they coming?
The Mechanist: Soon. (He looks at a clock candle which sparks once.) Very soon.
Aang: You can't give them more weapons.
The Mechanist: If I don't give them what they want they will destroy this place.

(The balloon has floated over to them. It catches on fire at the end of the Mechanist's sentence. It falls on the floor and the Mechanist moves to put out the flames by smothering it with a towel.)

Teo: How can I be proud of you when your inventions are being used for murder?
The Mechanist: I need some time to think. (After a pause, a little tinkling bell is heard.) You need to leave! Go!
Teo: We're not leaving!
The Mechanist (shooing them behind some stuff): Then hide, quickly!

(The Mechanist then pulls a lever and a wheel built into the floor begins to turn rapidly. A trap door in the floor next to the wheel opens and steam rises through the opening. A man in Fire Nation garb rises through the opening. He is standing on a square of wood that becomes flush with the rest of the floor when the elevator completes its movement.)

Emissary: You know better than to keep me waiting. (He approaches the Mechanist) Give me what you owe us so I can be on my way. (The Mechanist looks down) Well? (Putting his face in the Mechanist's face) Is there a problem?
The Mechanist (motioning out the door): No, right this way.

(The emissary begins to move to the door, but it is shut by a blast of air from Aang. He lands in front of the closed door. Cut to a frontal shot of Aang, obviously angered.)

Aang: The deal's off!
Emissary: The Avatar!
The Mechanist: Aang, don't get involved!
Emissary (pointing at the Mechanist): If I don't get what I came for the Fire Nation will burn this place to rubble!
Aang (striking the emissary with an air whip): Get out of here! You're leaving empty handed!
Emissary (pointing at Aang): Then the destruction of this temple will be on your head.

(Cut to the emissary going back down the elevator. Aang closes the trap door with a blast of air. Cut to a long, exterior shot of the temple, then a panning up shot much closer in. The camera reveals the kids and Teo on the same causeway to the satellite building they were on earlier.)

Sokka: This is bad! Very bad!
Katara: Aang, what are we gonna do? How can we possibly keep them all away?
Aang: I'll tell ya how. (Pointing to the sky) We have something they don't. (Screens moves fast to open sky where a few gliders are moving) Air power! We control the sky. That' something the Fire Nation can't do. We can win!
The Mechanist (from o.c.): I want to help.
Aang (smiling): Good, we'll need it.

(Cut to dusk shot of the Temple's exterior.)

The Mechanist (from o.c.): We finally got the war balloon working, thanks to Sokka.

(Cut to view of the Mechanist's office. It is full of people including his son and Katara, Sokka and Aang.)

The Mechanist: This boy's a genius!
Sokka: Thank you. You're a genius!
The Mechanist: Thank you!

(Cut to Aang and Katara who look at other strangely over this self-congratulatory exchange.)

Sokka: See, the problem with the old war balloon was you could get it airborne, but once you did, it just kept going. (He demonstrates with a model that goes up and hits the ceiling.) You could put a hole in the top, but then all the hot air would escape. So the question became, how do you keep a lid on hot air?
Katara (to Aang): Ugh, if only we knew.

(Aang, Teo and Katara laugh. Cut to Sokka working with another model, but this balloon has a mechanism to open and close a lid on its top.)

Sokka: A lid is actually the answer. If you control the hot air, you control the war balloon. (He demonstrates by pulling a string connected to the lid that opens and closes it.)
Katara: Hmm. That's actually pretty smart.
Sokka: Okay, we've got four kinds of bombs. Smoke, slime, fire and...
The Mechanist: ...stink. Never underestimate the power of stink!

(Cut to an exterior shot of the lower terrace. Many temple residents look out over the edge. The music has become threatening, reflecting the nervous anticipation on everyone's faces.)

Little Girl: They're coming!
Teo: Are we ready?
Katara: Yes, but where's Sokka with the war balloon?
Aang (jumping off Appa and opening his glider as he lands): We'll have to start without him.

(Momo lands on the top of Aang's glider. Cut to Teo smiling and putting on his goggles, then cut to an overhead shot of the terrace. It has now become a landing strip. Two rows of gliders stand ready to launch. Aang and Teo near there head. Teo gives a thumbs up, then Aang begins the launch sequence. He flies off, Teo behind and then the rest. The deck crews cheer as the gliders launch. Cut to a wide shot of the gliders taking off in formation from below. The screen pans down to the switchback path up to the Air Temple. It is choked with Fire Nation soldiers climbing up it. Up above, Aang and Teo dive, the other gliders in tow. They break through the cloud deck and start dropping various bombs on the surprised soldiers. Many fall off the path into the crevices below. Cut to a Fire Nation officer giving orders.)

Officer: Take them out of the sky, now!

(Cut to wide shot. The entire line, visible on two different switchbacks, of Fire Nation soldiers lowers their spears. They are bombed by gliders. Aang jumps off his glider onto a switchback just above the most advanced part of the Fire Nation infantry column. As he jumps he creates and air scooter. He rides along the length of the switchback, dumping huge amounts of snow and ice on the soldiers below. When he reaches the end of the switchback, he kills the air scooter and jumps back onto his glider which is gliding by. The avalanche he created continues to drop downward, engulfing row after row of soldiers. Those left begin to run back down the switchback path.)

Aang: We've got'em on the run! We need more slime!

(Cut to Appa floating motionless above the cloud deck. Katara hands bombs to gliders who pop up over Appa and then disappear back into the combat zone. Suddenly, several huge spikes shoot up through the clouds, narrowly missing Appa. The spikes are attached to chains that disappear, taught, into the clouds. The spikes embed themselves deep into the rock near the Temple. Cut to Appa flying hard to avoid the grappling hooks being thrown up all over the place.
The camera follows the chain back down the sheer mountain face. As it pans down, the squeaky wheels of tracked vehicles can be heard. Then, Fire Nation tanks roar onto the screen. With two, huge spiked wheels at each end, these heavily armored vehicles are using the grappling hooks to allow them to scale the cliff face. The gliders drops bombs on them, but they have little effect.

Aang flies up to the cliff face, sticks his glider staff into the naked rock, and pulls out one of the grappling hooks. The tank it was attached to begins to drop like a rock, but it fires another grappling hook straight up, narrowly missing Aang. It catches on the rock above, yanks taught, and the tank slams back into the mountain face and begins its climb once again.

The tanks climb the cliff face and gain the small plateau area at the base of the Temple. The firebenders in the turrets begin to fire blasts of flame, which the gliders avoid. They drop more bombs, but they are ineffective against the Fire Nation armor. One firebender gets slimed right as Aang drops into the center of an advancing platoon of tanks. Aang literally blows them away (and upside down) with blasts of air, but their central cabins of the tanks just flip over and they begin advancing again. The shoot more fire blasts at Aang, who avoids them. Cut to Katara on Appa flying next to Teo, all surveying the battlefield.)

Katara: Those things are unstoppable!
Teo: I think I know how they work. I remember my Dad tinkering with the counterbalancing system. Something to do with water. Works great, huh?
Katara: Water? Can you get me close to one?
Teo: No problem!

(Cut to Aang facing off alone against five tanks. They shoot fireball after fireball at him, but he bats them away. They advance on him steadily. Teo swoops into the picture and deposits Katara next to Aang. She assumes a bending stance, concentrates, and stops the forward momentum of one of the tanks with ice. Then, presumably bending the water within it, the tanks big wheels fall off. Cut back to Aang and Katara, where a grappling hook has grabbed Aang's staff. Katara lifts the tank up with a wall of ice and it falls over, broken. They have disposed of two tanks, but a full dozen now bear down on them. Aang jumps in front of Katara and starts batting away fire blasts. The tanks close in. Aang and Katara are suddenly blocked by the massive bulk of Appa who lands in front of them, roars, and tosses aside the two point tanks. Aang and Katara jump on Appa and he takes off. They survey the battlefield and it is clear that the situation is not good. Broken down tanks dot the battlefield, but most are still advancing, now closely supported by infantry formations. Cut back to the landing field terrace where Katara, Teo and Aang are in hasty council, with Momo in the foreground.)

Teo: We're out of bombs!
Katara: Come on, Sokka, where's that war balloon?

(As Katara speaks, the war balloon rises behind her in the background. The balloon is red and decked out with a Fire Nation symbol. It's removable top and tail fin give it a vaguely blimp like shape. The Mechanist and Sokka ride in the basket below the balloon. The basket also contains the coal burning plant that provides the heat for the balloon's air. Attached to the basket are four huge sacks of material used for ballast. The balloon moves out over the battlefield as the enemy armor advances below. Cut to a shot of Sokka and the Mechanist in the basket.)

Sokka: Hey, why aren't they shooting at us?
The Mechanist (cut to a view of the Fire Nation symbol): The insignia! They think we're on their side!
Sokka (cutting a rope with his knife): Then I guess they won't see this coming.
The Mechanist: Bomb away!

(Cut to a long shot of the balloon and the enemy troops and tanks underneath. One of the ballast sacks drops and blows in a huge explosion of slime on the ground. Sokka drops the other three bombs. The slime washes most of the infantry away, but the tanks continue. They reach the next cliff to scale and begin to use their grappling hooks.)

Sokka: Oh no! That was the last one!
The Mechanist: Wait a second, (he sniffs the air) you smell that?
Sokka: Rotten eggs!

(Cut to an overhead shot of the balloon. They are passing over a crevasse.)

Sokka: There! That's where the gas is escaping!

(Cut to a shot from below the balloon looking up at Sokka's face. He gets an idea. Cut to a shot of the tanks scaling the cliff, Air Temple residents working furiously up top to dislodge the grappling hooks. Cut back to Sokka who begins to ready the balloon's coal-burning plant to be thrown overboard.)

The Mechanist: What are you doing!? That's our fuel source!
Sokka: It's the only bomb we've got!

(The throw the coal furnace over board into the crevasse. It hits the sides on its way down. Cut to a few shots of the advancing Fire Nation soldiers and tanks as well as a few shots of the nerve-wracked defenders. Then shift to a long shot of the Temple, which is suddenly buffeted by a series of enormous, fiery explosions at its base. The coal furnace has ignited the escaping natural gas. The Temple is covered in smoke. When it clears, the grappling hook chains dangle in the breeze with nothing attached to them. In the distance, the remaining Fire Nation troops are running back down the mountain. In the foreground, Aang and company watch the enemy leave.)

Aang: Look! They're retreating!
All: Yeh!!!

(Suddenly the war balloon enters the frame on a clear downward trajectory.)

Sokka: We're going down!
Katara: No! Sokka! Hold on!

(Aang springs into action, unfolding his glider and taking off in one smooth action. Cut to the descending balloon. It's hot air is cooling rapidly. Sokka swings his boomerang around attached to a rope.)

Sokka: Get ready!

(As Aang flies by, Sokka throws the boomerang. It catches on Aang's foot, pulling Sokka and the Mechanist clear of the falling balloon. Aang flies them back up, while the balloon continues to fall. Fade back a long shot of the main terrace of the Air Temple, the cut to a close shot of Aang and his friends. Behind Aang is a circular stone bench on which Katara and some of the black and white hermit crabs sit.)

Aang: You know what? I'm really glad you guys all live here now. It's like the hermit crab (he picks one up from the stone bench.), maybe you weren't born here, but you found this empty shell and made it your home. And now you protect each other.
Teo: That means a lot coming from you.
Sokka: Aang, you were right about air power. (Pointing to the sky) As long as we've got the skies we'll have the Fire Nation on the run!

(Cut to a wide, long shot of the terrace as gliders fly by. The crowd cheers Sokka. Then cut to a wide shot of Aang and his friends as the camera pans right. The shot stops on the Mechanist who turns towards the camera and looks down, troubled by something. Fade to a shot of snow covered trees as the camera pans down. When the pan stops, a group of Fire Nation soldiers stand around the fallen war balloon. The are heating the air in the balloon, causing it to refill. Cut to a frontal shot of a Fire Nation commander flanked on each side by a guard.)

Commander: This defeat is the gateway to many victories.

(He smiles, then cut to the resurgent Fire Nation symbol on the side of the balloon as it finishes refilling. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Opening shot of some open water. Almost instantly a koala otter backstrokes into view. He looks up as a shadow passes over him. He ducks beneath the waves as Appa passes just overhead. Cut to Sokka leaning over Appa's saddle, looking backwards over his beaver like tail in the direction they came from.)

Sokka (petulantly): I'm not one to complain, but can't Appa fly any higher?

(Cut to a side view of Appa flying across an ice field in the open ocean. He is clearly tired. He glides lower, his feet brushes the water. Cut to a view atop Appa looking forward to Aang in Appa's driver's seat, Katara in the foreground behind him in the saddle, who turns around and answers Sokka angrily.)

Aang: I have an idea, why don't we all get on your back and you can fly us to the North Pole?
Sokka: I'd love to! Climb on everyone (he wiggles his butt at everyone), Sokka's ready for takeoff!

(Momo jump up on Sokka in response to his invitation.)

Katara: Look, we're all just a little tired and cranky because we've been flying for two days straight.
Sokka: And for what? We can't even find the Northern Water Tribe. There's nothing up here.

(Suddenly a noise is heard up ahead. Ice is moving rapidly towards Appa. Cut to Aang who screams and pulls Appa's reigns to starboard. Appa banks right and avoids the ice, but almost tips his passengers off the saddle, who hang on for dear life. Appa then banks left as another jet of ice erupts out of the waves, but this one slams into Appa's underside, who drops in an uncontrolled spin into the water. Out of the icebergs several ornate wooden skiffs come to surround Appa. They are manned by people in water tribe garb.)

Katara: They're waterbenders! We found the Water Tribe!

(Cut to a wide shot of Appa trapped in ice, surrounded by Water Tribe ships, then cut to a Fire Navy port. Ships line the harbor in the background. In the foreground is a tent surrounded by guards. Cut to Admiral Zhao, looking at a map of the world, back to the camera.)

Zhao: He's heading north. The Northern Water Tribe. The Avatar needs to master waterbending. He's looking for a teacher.

(Zhao has turned around to address the others in the room. His officers sit cross legged on the floor.)

Captain Li: Then what are we waiting for? Let's go get him!
Zhao: Patience, Captain Li. This isn't some little Earth village we can just march into. The Water Tribe is a great nation. There's a reason they've survived a hundred years of war. The frozen tundra is treacherous. The landscape itself is an icy fortress. We'll need a massive invasion force.

(Cut back to Appa swimming in formation with the Water Tribe boats. Aang gets up and points ahead.)

Aang: There it is!

(Cut to a view of an ice wall with towers and turrets.)

Katara (from o.c. with wonder): The Northern Water Tribe...
Sokka: We're finally here...

(Cut to a view of one of the water tribe skiffs, where the waterbender crew waterbends in unison. Cut to a view of the city wall, where the waterbenders have removed a semi-circular opening to reveal a tunnel that leads into the city. Cut back to Appa and the kids, one of the waterbenders on the skiff in the foreground. He motions them forward and Appa swims in. Cut to a view inside the tunnel as Appa swims in, then cut to the lock where the tunnel opens into. Switch to an overhead view showing that the lock is square and that the waterbenders line the tops of the lock's four walls. The three sides of the lock not adjacent to the main wall have water behind them almost to the height of the city wall. The waterbenders open sluice gates along the three walls of the lock to raise the water level. The wall opposite the main city wall begins to lower itself, ultimately to free a path for Appa to continue. Cut to a closer view of Aang and Katara.)

Katara: I can't believe how many waterbenders live up here!
Aang: We'll find a master to teach us, no problem!

(Cut to a long shot of the lock wall dropping beneath the water line, with a few boats waiting in the channel beyond as Appa swims out. Cut to a frontal shot of the kids on Appa, smiling and looking around them in wonder. Shift to long, overhead panorama shot of the city. It is made of ice and is breathtakingly beautiful. It also has three interior walls in addition to the main city walls. All the way in the back is apparently some sort of citadel or temple. Cut to an overhead shot of the roof of one of the buildings in the city. An older man and a young boy watch as Appa follows a Water Tribe skiff through the canals. Soon more people join them. In fact, as they go, small crowds of people begin to gawk at them from houses and foot bridges. Aang waves at them as they pass. The city is loaded with beautiful streams, waterfalls and fountains. They pass another boat with a waterbender and a beautiful young Water Tribe woman with white, elaborately styled hair and a slightly purplish coat rather than the normal blue. Sokka focuses on her, blushes and tried to follow her by running down Appa's tail.)

Katara (from o.c.): This place is beautiful.
Sokka (looking dreamily at the girl as he boat moves away): Yeh, she is.

(Cut to a view of the rapidly waning, almost new moon. The view pans down to reveal Prince Zuko's ship at dock. The sound of a stringed instrument can be heard playing a simple staccato tune. Cut to a close up of the instrument and the hand playing it. The view pans up to reveal the musician to be Lieutenant Jee. The tune is then accompanied by drums. Cut to a wider shot that reveal four men around a camp fire on the main deck of the ship. One of them is Lieutenant Jee, another is General Iroh.)

Iroh (singing slightly out of tune): Winter, spring, summer and fall. Wi/bnter and spring, summer and fall. Four seasons, four loves. Four seasons, four loves.

(During the song, two crewmen dance in front of the fire. Then a group of masked Fire Nation soldiers board the ship including Admiral Zhao. The music stops as the intruders are noted. Iroh and the others turn to look at the newcomers.

Cut back to a view of the Northern Water Tribe city which is quickly replaced by a shot of three Water Tribe men playing huge kettle drums in unison. Cut to a wide shot of a plaza near the main citadel. A huge fountain dominates the rear of the plaza. On either side huge pews made out of ice provide seating for many onlookers. The closest side of the plaza shows the backs of the city's rulers as well as the guests of honor, Aang and his friends. Cut to a frontal shot of the city dignitaries table. Sokka is on the far side and down below Appa can be seen. A couple of attendants bring him a huge pallet of food. He roars and then and they run screaming, with Sokka smiling at this in the foreground. Appa begins to eat. Cut back to a view of the center of the plaza, where four attendants lower some sort of huge steaming platter of food or something onto a stage in front of them.)

Chief Arnook (standing to address the crowd): Tonight, we celebrate the arrival of our brother and sister from the Southern Tribe, and they have brought with them someone very special, someone whom many of us believed disappeared from the world until now. (Indicating Aang) The Avatar! (The crowd cheers.) We also celebrate my daughter's 16th birthday. (He backs up out of the frame to reveal the beautiful girl with the white hair, flanked by two attendants, walking up to the table. They all bow, smiling.) Princess Yue is now of marrying age.

(Sokka looks at her with wide eyes.)

Princess Yue: Thank you, father. May the great Ocean and Moon Spirits watch over us during these troubled times.
Chief Arnook: Now, Master Pakku and his students will perform!

(The Chief motions towards three men who now stand on the dais in front of the fountain opposite the dignitaries' table. The center man is clearly the eldest with a bald head, but long white hair on the sides of his head and down his back. The begin waterbending water from three enormous amphorae in front of them. The crowd begins to cheer. Cut to Aang and Katara who look at each in utter delight while they clap. As the waterbending show continues, cut to Sokka stuffing his face full of food. A figure walks behind him and sits down next to him. It is Princess Yue. He gulps his mouthful and tries to strike a cool pose next to her.)

Sokka (in a cheesy voice): Hi, there. Sokka, Southern Water Tribe.
Princess Yue (smiling and bowing slightly): Very nice to meet you.
Sokka (after a brief pause, trying desperately to strike up a conversation): So... uh... you're a Princess! (She nods and smiles) You know, back in my tribe, I'm kinda like a Prince myself!

(Shot pans left to reveal Katara.)

Katara: Ha! Prince of what?
Sokka (angry): A lot of things! Uh, do you mind? I'm trying to have a conversation here!
Katara (with a mock bow): My apologies, Prince Sokka.
Sokka (turning back to Yue and trying to recover): So it looks like I'm gonna be in town for awhile. I'm thinking maybe we could...(then lamely) do an activity together?
Princess Yue: Do an “activity”?

(Sokka, sweating, pauses then stuffs his mouth with some stuff on the table. Screens widens to the left to show Katara clearly enjoying her brother's lame attempt at courting.)

Katara: Very smooth.

(Cut to a long shot of the plaza fountain. In front of it stand the Chief, Master Pakku and Aang.)

Chief Arnook: Master Pakku, meet your newest student, the Avatar.

(Aang bows.)

Master Pakku: Just because you're destined to save the world, don't expect any special treatment.
Aang (trying to ignore this): My friend and I can't wait to start training with you – after we relax for a couple days.
Master Pakku: If you want to relax, then I suggest visiting a tropical island. If not, I'll see you both at sunrise. Good night.

(Master Pakku walks away, Chief Arnook shrugs. Cut to a shot of Prince Zuko in a dark cabin on his ship. His arms are folded across his chest. The door at the far end of the cabin opens and Iroh leans in. Zuko does not look at him.)

Zuko: For the last time, I'm not playing the sumki horn.
Iroh: No, it's about our plans. There's a bit of a problem.

(Zhao enters the room behind Iroh.)

Zhao: I'm taking your crew.
Zuko (turning to face Zhao): What!?
Zhao: I've recruited them for a little expedition to the North Pole.
Zhao: Uncle, is that true?
Iroh: I'm afraid so. He's taking everyone. (Putting his arm over his face in woe) Even the cook!
Zhao: Sorry you won't be there to watch me capture the Avatar. But I can't have you getting in my way again.

(Zuko charges him in anger, but Iroh prevents him from tackling Zhao, who walks over to inspect the curved broadswords on the wall used – the same used by the Blue Spirit to free the Avatar. Cut to a close up of Zhao's face, swollen in anger as he recognizes the blades. Cut to a series of flashbacks as he remembers the Blue Spirit wielding the blades during the escape. He takes one off the wall, then cut to Zuko's face, his eyes wide and mouth open, clearly recognizing the danger he is in. Iroh, visible over Zuko's shoulder, does not. Cut back to Zuko, who begins practicing with the sword he has removed from the wall.)

Zhao: I didn't know you were skilled with broadswords, Prince Zuko.
Zuko: I'm not. They're antiques. Just decorative.
Zhao: Have you heard of the Blue Spirit, General Iroh?
Iroh: Just rumors. I don't think he is real.
Zhao: He's real all right. He's a criminal, an enemy of the Fire Nation. (He hands the broad sword to Iroh) But I have a feeling that justice will catch up with him soon. (Zhao moves to exit the cabin) General Iroh, the offer to join my mission still stands if you change your mind.

(Zhao closes the door behind him. Cut back to a morning shot back in the Northern Water Tribe City. Katara and Aang are walking towards a huge ice staircase up to the citadel.)

Katara: I've waited for this day my whole life! I finally get to learn from a real waterbending master!

(Cut to a shot of Master Pakku manipulating a blob of water. The screen pans right to reveal Aang and Katara behind him.)

Aang: Good morning, Master Pakku!
Master Pakku (dropping the water blob with a grimace): No, please, march right in, I'm not concentrating or anything.
Aang: Uhh... this is my friend, Katara, the one I told you about?

(Katara bows while Aang introduces her. Master Pakku looks over at her as if she were a bug.)

Master Pakku (creating an ice chair for him to sit down in): I'm sorry. I think there's been a misunderstanding. You didn't tell me your friend was a girl. In our tribe, it is forbidden for women to learn waterbending.

(Cut to a shot panning up Katara's body, her face clearly reflecting the anger she feels. Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(When the show returns, cut back to long, overhead shot of the Northern Water Tribe city, looking back from the main wall back to the citadel. Cut back to a close up of Katara.)

Katara: What do you mean you won't teach me? (Walking up to Pakku) I didn't travel across the entire world so you could tell me “no”!
Master Pakku: No.
Katara (hands on her hips): But there must be other female waterbenders in your tribe!
Master Pakku: Here the women learn from Yugoda to use their waterbending to heal. I'm sure she would be happy to take you as her student despite your bad attitude.
Katara: I don't want to heal, I want to fight!
Master Pakku: I can see that. But our tribe has customs, rules.
Katara: Well your rules stink!

(Aang enters the frame behind her in the background.)

Aang: Yeh! They're not fair. If you won't teach Katara, then –
Master Pakku (standing up): Then what?
Aang: Then I won't learn from you!

(Aang turns and begins to walk away.)

Master Pakku: Well have fun teaching yourself. I'm sure you'll do a great job.
Katara: Wait! (To Pakku) Aang didn't mean that.

(Katara runs over to Aang's retreating figure and grabs him by the shoulder to stop him.)

Katara: You can't risk your training for me. You have to learn from Master Pakku. Even if he is a big jerk.

(Aang nods his head glumly, and swings his body around lazily to face his new master. Cut to a close up of Pakku's smug face.)

Master Pakku: Why don't we get started then.

(Master Pakku waterbends a huge rush of water at Aang, washing him out of the frame. Cut to Sokka running over a footbridge that spans one of the city's many canals. Beneath the bridge, Princess Yue's boat slowly moves along.)

Sokka: Princess Yue! Good morning! (Coming up beside her boat on the sidewalk along the side of the canal and walking with her boat as it floats down the canal.) Hey, how about that picnic last night? Boy, your Dad sure knows how to throw a party.
Princess Yue: I'm happy you enjoyed yourself.
Sokka: Well, it wasn't as much fun after you left.

(Princess Yue looks away, blushing. Cut back to Sokka, a huge, toothy smile on his face. He blushes too.)

Sokka: So, I'm still hoping we can see more of each other.
Princess Yue: Do an “activity”, you mean?
Sokka (eyes wide, clearly excited): Yes! At... a place! For... some time!
Princess Yue: I'd love to! (She points ahead, cut to a shot of a bridge in front of them, she continues from o.c.) I'll meet you on that bridge tonight.
Sokka: Great! I'll see you – aahh!

(Sokka drops out of sight. The sidewalk has ended, but the was to busy gawking at Yue to realize it. Yue laughs and waves goodbye to him as he hauls himself out of the water.)

Princess Yue: Sorry!
Sokka (to himself, as he falls over backwards to lie flat on the sidewalk): That's okay, it was worth it. (Shot zooms out and rotates) See you tonight.

(Cut back to the Fire Navy port from earlier in the episode. Zhao begins to speak from o.c.)

Zhao: I'm very impressed.

(Cut to Zhao seated at his desk, a small chest and a lamp in front of him. Two men face him – pirates last seen in “The Waterbending Scroll.”)

Zhao: You all seem highly qualified for the mission I have in mind.

(A pair of hands reaches for the chest and pulls it towards him. Cut a view from Zhao's p.o.v. to show the entire pirate gang, including the Captain (complete with his green, reptilian parrot), who has opened the chest to reveal glowing riches inside. The Pirate Salesmen removes a gold piece and bites it.)

Pirate Barker: That's some tasty gold!

(The Captain grabs it and puts it back in the chest. He leans forward and looks skeptically into the camera.)

Pirate Captain: What do you need us to do?
Zhao (smiling): I believe you're acquainted with Prince Zuko?

(Cut to a brief shot of the outside of a building in the Northern Water Tribe city, then cut to a view from inside the building. Inside, a man sized dummy lies flat on a stone bed in the middle of the main chamber. The dummy has pathways or channels etched all over its surface. A hand bends water through the pathways which flow white the same way Katara's hands did when she healed herself in “The Deserter.” Cut to a wide shot of the room. Around the stone bed sit half a dozen students while the teacher, an old woman, demonstrates. Katara has entered the room on her left.)

Katara: Um, hi. Are you Yagoda?
Yugoda: Are you here for the healing lesson?

(Katara surveys the room. The students are all girls who look younger than she. Katara looks at the ground glumly.)

Katara (walking forward and sitting down): I guess I am.
Yugoda: Welcome! Welcome!

(Cut to Aang moving around a blob of water while Master Pakku, sitting cross-legged with a bowl of steaming soup in front him, gives instruction. Aang looks unhappy and sullen.)

Master Pakku: You're moving the water around, but you're not feeling the push and pull.
Aang (through gritted teeth): I'm trying!
Master Pakku (lifting the soup and sucking out some food from it): Maybe that move is too advanced for you. Why don't you try an easier one?

(Aang throws the water to the ground in frustration. Cut back to an exterior shot of the healer's building, then cut to the inner chamber. The young girls are taking the dummy out on its stretcher, leaving Katara and Yugoda. Katara walks over to her teacher.)

Katara: Thanks for the lesson.
Yugoda: So, who's the lucky boy?
Katara: Huh?
Yugoda (pointing at her neck): Your betrothal necklace. You're getting married, right?
Katara (smiling): No, I don't think I'm ready for that yet. My grandmother gave my mother this necklace, and my mother passed it down to me.
Yugoda (looking closely at the necklace): I recognize this carving! I don't know why I didn't realize sooner! You're the spitting image of Kana!
Katara (starting backwards in surprise): Wait, how do you know my Gran-Gran's name?
Yugoda: When I was about your age I was friends with Kana. She was born here, in the Northern Tribe.
Katara (looking away): She never told me.
Yugoda: Your grandmother had an arranged marriage with a young waterbender. He carved that necklace for her.
Katara: If Gran-Gran was engaged, why did she leave?
Yugoda: I don't know. That's always been a mystery to me. She left without saying goodbye.

(Cut back to a night shot of Prince Zuko's ship at the dock. The crew stand outside the ship and one of them yells “good luck!”, then cut to a shot of Prince Zuko lying in bed in the foreground of his cabin. The door opens and Iroh sticks his head in.)

Iroh: The crew wanted me to wish you safe travels.
Zuko: Good riddance to those traitors.
Iroh: It's a lovely night for a walk. Why don't you join me? It would clear your head. (Iroh's smiles falls away as Zuko refuses to respond.) Or, just stay in your room and sit in the dark. Whatever makes you happy.

(Iroh leaves, closing the door behind him. Cut to an exterior view of the ship from the prow looking aft. Iroh's silhouette can be seen walking down the gang plank to the dock. He is humming the song he was singing earlier. As he passes by the Pirate Captain's green parrot flies by. Cut to a long shot of the ship. Some time evidently passes by before the next shot, but it is still the same night. Cut to a view of the main deck where the pirates are climbing aboard. The Pirate Barker goes over the opposite railing of the ship and lowers down some ropes with hooks at end. Below in a small skiff are two other pirates with barrels of explosives. They attach the hooks to the barrels which are then hoisted up. One of the pirates on the deck almost drops the barrel, but recovers.)

Pirate Barker (whispering): Careful with the blasting jelly!

(Cut to the Pirate Barker turning one of the door latches. It makes a much larger noise then he thought, then cut to Zuko who sit straight up in bed, alarmed.)

Zuko (getting up): Uncle? (Opening his door to look out into the corridor) Uncle, is that you?

(He jumps out into the hallway in a fighting stance. Warily, he advances to the bridge, ready for instant combat around every corner. Cut to the main deck where the pirates light a trail of gunpowder and then run off the ship. Cut back and forth between Zuko walking around the bridge and the lit trail of gunpowder. At last, Zuko turns and looks out one of the bridge windows to see the Pirate Captain's green parrot. It croaks at him and then takes off. Cut to a close of Zuko's eyes as the realization of what the bird's appearance means strikes him. It is too late. Cut to the lit gunpowder reaching the barrels of blasting jelly. The bridge deck and main deck explode, blasting Zuko out the bridge window. This explosion is repeated several times from different angles, the last being a long, wide shot. Another explosion rips the vessel completely open mid ship. Cut to Iroh walking down a dirt road, the explosion in full bloom behind him. He has turned to look. Cut to a frontal view, his face contorted with surprise and fear.)

Iroh: Zuko!

(He begins to run back to the ship. Cut back to the burning ship. Iroh's reaches the dock, burning debris falling all around him. Cut to a wider shot from some distance behind him. He is dwarfed by the massive fireball that was Zuko's ship. Cut back to Iroh's face, well lit by the conflagration.)

Iroh (lowering his face in sadness): Zuko...

(Cut to a long shot of the remnants of the burning ship. Fade to a shot panning down of a canal in the Northern Water City. It is night. Cut to Sokka running up the winding staircase attached to the bridge where Yue waits to meet him. He sidles up to her. She looks disturbed.)

Sokka: Hi, Princess Yue. (Offering her something) I made you something. I carved it myself.

(Cut to a shot of Sokka's hand. In it rests a rudely carved wooden object.)

Princess Yue: It's a bear.
Sokka: Actually, it's a fish (he turns it sideways), see it has a fin.
Princess Yue: Oh. (Beginning to break down.) I'm sorry! I made a mistake. (She turns away from him) I shouldn't have asked you to come here!

(Yue runs away, out of the frame. Cut back to a stunned and hurt Sokka. He throws the carving into the canal in anger. Fade to an exterior shot of a small house in the Water City, apparently where the kids are staying. Cut to the inside where Sokka, Katara, Momo and Aang sit on a huge rug.)

Katara: How's warrior training going?

(In response Sokka kicks a bag on the floor in anger, falls to his knees, and then flops on the bag, using it as a pillow.)

Aang: That bad?
Sokka: No, it's Princess Yue. I don't get it. One minute she wants to go out with me and the next she's telling me to get lost! (Pause.) So how's waterbending training?

(Katara flops onto her sleeping bag, depressed. Her hood flops over her head.)

Aang: Master Poophead won't teach her because she's a girl.
Sokka: Why don't you just teach her, Aang?
Katara (raising her head with a smile): Why didn't I think of that? (Getting up.) At night, you can teach whatever moves you learned from Master Pakku. That way you have someone to practice with and I get to learn waterbending. Everyone's happy!
Sokka: I'm not happy.
Katara: But you're never happy. Come on, Aang.

(She leaves, Aang in tow. Sokka remains lying down, a sour expression on his face. Momo chitters at him, then cut to an overhead shot of Katara and Aang at a canal. They are on some sort of ledge or small plaza that ends with steps that go down into the canal water. The camera pans down as Aang raises a whip of water out of the canal.)

Aang: Master Pakku said this move is all about sinking and floating.

(He sends the water over to Katara who starts to bend it.)

Katara: I got it!

(The water begins to whip around her very fast, then up and out of the frame entirely. Cut to Aang, holding the sides of his head in excitement.)

Aang: That was amazing!
Katara: That wasn't me.

(Camera pans rapidly up and to the right to reveal Master Pakku standing on the bridge above him. He has the water Katara had been bending. He freezes it and breaks into pieces in a shower of icicles that embed themselves in the bridge before him.)

Aang: I... I was just showing Katara a few moves.
Master Pakku: You have disrespected me, my teachings, and my entire culture.
Aang: I'm sorry, I –
Master Pakku: You are no longer welcome as my student.

(He turns and walks away, leaving an astonished Aang and Katara. Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(When the show returns, the opening shot is of the plaza where the feast was held. The shot pans down a bit to reveal a long shot of Katara, Sokka and Aang in front of the Chief, Princess Yue, Master Pakku, and what looks to be the tribe's council who all sit on a dais.)

Chief Arnook: What do you want me to do? Force Master Pakku to take Aang back as his student?
Katara: Yes – please!
Chief Arnook: I suspect he might change his mind if you swallow your pride and apologize to him.

(Cut to Katara with Aang in the background. The idea is hateful to her and it shows. Her eyes moves to Aang and she turns to look at him. She turns, back, clearly unhappy.)

Katara: Fine.

(Cut back to Master Pakku, who smiles smugly.)

Master Pakku: I'm waiting, little girl.

(Cut to Katara's hand, which balls up instantly to a fist at this insult, then shift to a view of her from Master Pakku's p.o.v.)

Katara: No! No way am I apologizing to a sour old man like you!

(A she speaks, cracks open in the floor beneath her as her waterbending abilities begin to get out of control. She ends up by pointing directly at Master Pakku, her finger almost in his face. At the conclusion of her statement, the massive water pots at either end of the dais.)

Aang: Uh, Katara...

(Cut to a close of Katara.)

Katara (a look of challenge on her face): I'll be outside – if you're man enough to fight me!

(Princess Yue draws breath in surprise as the men stiffen. Cut to a long shot of the room with Katara in the foreground leaving the building. The others stand frozen. Cut back to Aang and Sokka.)

Aang: I'm sure she didn't mean that.
Sokka: Yeh, I think she did.

(Cut to a close up someone pouring tea. The red background suggests we have moved to a Fire Nation scene. We have. Cut to a wider shot of Iroh and Zhao having tea opposite each other at a low table. A map of the world hanging on the wall occupies much of the shot behind them.)

Zhao: I'm devastated to hear about Prince Zuko. (Cheesily) Just devastated.

(Cut to a close up Iroh's pained face, his eyes closed.)

Iroh (opening his eyes): The Fire Lord will not be pleased he learns who was responsible.
Zhao (suspicious, frowning): You know who... was behind the attack?
Iroh: Yes... (slamming table with his fist) pirates! We had a run in with them awhile back.

(Cut to a close of Zhao's mouth as his frown turns to a smile.)

Iroh: They wanted revenge.
Zhao (after taking a sip of tea): So, have you reconsidered my offer?
Iroh (bowing): Yes, I accept. It will be an honor to serve as your general. (Raising his glass in a toast) To the Fire Nation!
Zhao (raising his glass): To victory!

(Camera pans up and fades to an outside view of the naval base and the Fire Nation flag fluttering in the wind. Cut back to the Northern Water Tribe city where the three kids are walking down the long steps of the citadel.)

Sokka: Are you crazy, Katara? You're not gonna win this fight!
Katara (taking off her coat and throwing it at Sokka, hitting him in the face): I know! I don't care!
Aang: You don't have to do this for me. I can find another teacher.
Katara: I'm not doing it for you! Someone needs to slap some sense into that guy!

(They reach the bottom of the steps as Master Pakku appears at the top. Katara turns and sees him.)

Katara: So, you decided to show up? (He walks past her.) Aren't you gonna fight?
Master Pakku (without turning): Go back to the healing huts with the other women where you belong.

(Insanely angry, Katara draws a water whip out of the ground and whips Pakku on the back on the neck. He stops.)

Master Pakku (turning to face her): Fine. You want to learn to fight so bad, study closely!

(Cut to a wide shot from the view of someone standing on the steps of the citadel. On either side of the plaza at the bottom of the steps there are two huge pools. Master Pakku grabs most of the water in each and bends it around himself. Katara runs at him, but she is flung backwards when she is hit by the water. She stands, now perhaps ten feet from Pakku. He bends the water in a wall around both of them. It spins faster and faster creating a whirlpool effect.)

Master Pakku (mockingly): Don't worry, I'm not going to hurt you!

(The whirlpool constricts, but before Katara is knocked back down she swings her arm, almost as if she were swinging a baseball bat, deflecting the wall of water off on a different trajectory. Cut to a shot of the spectators, including Aang and Sokka. The errant wall of water hits Sokka and blows him out of them frame with an exclamation of “OW!” Cut to a view from behind Master Pakku as Katara runs at him with a water whip. He raises a ramp of ice in front of her which she slides up and then back flips off, landing neatly on the guardrail of the citadel steps behind him. Pakku liquefies the ramp and throws it at her while catching her feet in ice. The wave breaks around Katara, however, as she bends it out of the way.)

Katara: You can't knock me down!

(The crowd behind her cheers.)

Aang: Go Katara!

(Cut to a shot from Pakku's p.o.v. A very angry and determined Katara is bearing down on him. Shift to a side view as Pakku raises a sheet of ice between him and the raging girl. Katara liquefies the ice as she reaches it and throws several blows at Pakku, one of which narrowly misses his face, before he washes her out of his way and into one of the pools with a wave of water. Cut to a head shot of Pakku, who smiles with satisfaction. She breaks the surface of the water and the crowd cheers. Katara then raises a circular pedestal of ice out of the fountain pool and begins to shoot slivers of the top of the pedestal at Pakku. Cut to Pakku who breaks them as they arrive with swift Tai Chi movements. The last one however narrowly passes to the left side of his face. The frame rates slows down noticeable with a sound effect for further accent. Pakku can see his own reflection in the passing sheet of ice – it is both surprised and dismayed. The frame rate speeds up again as it passes out of the shot. When it is gone, he turns back to Katara with a bewildered and, perhaps, somewhat impressed look on his face. Cut back to Katara who is bending a stream of water around her which she throws at Pakku, who catches it and begins to twirl it around him. Katara runs at him again, but he washes her backwards and onto her behind when he releases the stream of water. Cut to a close of Aang and Sokka, who await in stunned anticipation of the outcome. Cut back to a side close of Katara's face, her hair disheveled, breathing heavily. Then shift to a front view of Katara as she jumps back up in a bending stance. She makes a motion and the segmented pillars of ice behind Pakku collapse, narrowly missing him.)

Master Pakku: Well, I'm impressed. You are an excellent waterbender.
Katara: But you still won't teach me, will you?
Master Pakku: No.

(With a cry of effort, Katara raises water near her feet, freezes it, and send it in a rolling wave along the floor to Pakku, who is raised up on a pillar of ice when the wave reaches him. He liquefies the base of the ice column and begins to flow forward on it, like an iceberg riding along a river. Katara has raised her own stream of water and knocks him off his iceberg, but Pakku grabs Katara's water and freezes it in an arc around her with he slides around. As he exits the arc he knocks her down, her necklace falling to ice near her. Cut to a close shot of Katara, breathing heavily, her long black hair now loose around her. Cut to Pakku raising a huge column of water out of one of the pools, making a whirlpool out of it in the air and then freezing it into shards the whirlpool disintegrates. Cut back to Katara now standing in front of Pakku, but the shards land closely all around her. She is trapped. She struggles in vain against her prison of ice, her hands and arms unable to move.)

Master Pakku (walking towards her): This fight is over.
Katara: Come back here! I'm not finished yet!
Master Pakku: Yes, you are.

(He stops in surprise, picking up the necklace.)

Master Pakku (in wonder): This is my necklace!
Katara: No it's not, it's mine! Give it back!
Master Pakku: I made this sixty years ago – for the love of my life. (Katara's ice prison liquefies behind him, freeing her.) For Kana.
Katara: My Gran-Gran was supposed to marry you?

(Cut to an exterior shot of the Fire Navy base. Ships line the dock. Shift to a shot of Iroh walking down a corridor in Zhao's ship toward the camera, a guard walking in the other direction. They stop when abreast of each other and begin to whisper.)

Iroh: Our plan is working perfectly. Zhao doesn't suspect a thing.
Zuko (removing his guard mask): You didn't have to do this.
Iroh: No nephew of mine is going to stow away on a ship without some backup!
Zuko: Thank you, Uncle.
Iroh (hearing a sound): Someone's coming! (Zuko replaces his mask) Stay hidden until we get to the North Pole and the Avatar will be yours! Good luck!

(They separate and exit the frame. Cut back to the Water City.)

Master Pakku (still holding the necklace, sadly): I carved this necklace for your grandmother when we got engaged. I thought we would have a long, happy life together. I loved her.
Katara: But she didn't love you, did she? It was an arranged marriage.

(Cut to a shot of Yue and Sokka. The Princess' eyes water and Katara's pronouncement.)

Katara (walking up to Pakku): Gran-Gran wouldn't let your tribe's stupid customs run her life. That's why she left. It must have taken a lot of courage.

(Cut back to Yue and Sokka. She begins to cry openly and runs away. The shot expands to show Aang and Chief Arnook next to Sokka.)

Aang: Go get her.

(Sokka runs after her. Cut to a night shot of the city. Yue stand alone on the same bridge as before. A tear streams down her face as she hears footsteps approaching.)

Princess Yue: What do you want from me?
Sokka: Nothing. I just want you to know, I think you're beautiful... and, I never thought a girl like you would even notice a guy like me.
Princess Yue: You don't understand.
Sokka: No, no, see, that's the thing. I think I do understand now. You're a princess, and I... I'm just a southern peasant.
Princess Yue: No, Sokka...
Sokka: It's okay. You don't have to say anything. (Turning to leave) I'll see ya around, okay?

(She grabs him and kisses him.)

Sokka: Okay, now I'm really confused! Happy – but confused!

(He holds her hands in his.)

Princess Yue: I do like you! A lot. But, we can't be together – and not for the reason you think. It's because... (she pulls down the collar of her coat to reveal a necklace) ...I'm engaged. I'm sorry!

(She runs away. Fade to a morning shot of the plaza at the base of the citadel. The ruined pillars of ice are visible in the background from the battle the day before between Katara and Pakku. Near the steps, several students, including Aang, stand before Master Pakku. Aang is waterbending around a ball of water. He throws the ball of water o.c. after a few motions.)

Master Pakku: Not bad! Not bad! Heheh! Keep practicing and maybe you'll get it by the time you're my age!

(Aang looks momentarily unhappy, but then turns with a smile at the sound of footsteps behind him. Cut to Katara running to the group.)

Aang: Hey Katara!

(She bows to Pakku.)

Master Pakku (icily): What do you think you're doing? It's past sunrise. (Smiling) You're late.
Aang: Good to see ya here.
Katara (smiling): You too.

(Cut to a wide shot of them practicing, then fade to a shot of the upper decks of Zhao's ship. The view pans down to reveal Iroh and Zhao on the outside walkway around the bridge.)

Zhao: My fleet is ready. Set a course for the Northern Water Tribe.

(Cut to a panning overhead shot. It reveals dozens of Fire Navy ships firing up their engines in preparation to launch the final assault on the Northern Water Tribe. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Opening scene begins with an underwater shot in one of the Water Tribe City canals. The camera pans up above the water line to reveal the canal and the surrounding buildings. Cut to the plaza at the foot of the citadel steps where Katara faced off with Master Pakku in "The Waterbending Master." The segmented ice columns that Katara toppled during the duel have been repaired. It is morning and two waterbending students face off against each other. Cut to the student on the left, a nervous looking teenage boy whose left eye twitches slightly in anxiety. Cut to a close up of the boy's opponent – Katara. She looks very confident, a slight smile on her face. Cut back to a longer shot of the boy who raises up a ball of water, turns it to ice, and throws it at his opponent. Katara bends the ice around her, liquefies it, and sends a huge stream of water back at the boy who is washed up and backwards. As he is washed away, the water turns to ice, imprisoning him about ten feet of the ground. Cut back to Katara who relinquishes her waterbending stance while Pakku approached from over her shoulder.)

Master Pakku: Nice try, Pupil Sangok. A couple of more years and you might be ready to fight a sea sponge.

(Pupil Sangok continues to struggle against his bonds. Master Pakku turns away, makes a motion with his left hand, and the ice prison melts, dropping the hapless student to the ground. Cut to a wide that pans right over the rest of the students who are sitting slumped on the ground. These all appear to teenage boys.)

Master Pakku: Would anyone care for a rematch with Katara?

(They all shake their heads.)

Master Pakku: Katara, you have advanced more quickly than any student I have ever trained. You have proven that with fierce determination, passion and hard work you can accomplish anything. (Turning to look o.c.) Raw talent alone is not enough.

(Cut to Aang lying on the ground, floating Momo around on an airball, a lazy smile on his face.)

Master Pakku (voice over): Pupil Aang!

(Momo's airball dissipates and Momo falls on Aang's head.)

Aang: Yes, Master Pakku?
Master Pakku: Care to step into the sparring circle? I figure since you've found time to play with house pets you must have already mastered waterbending.

(Aang airbends himself to his feet.)

Aang: I wouldn't say "mastered", but check this out!

(Aang spins around, collecting snow around him as he goes. When he is done, he has made himself into a snowman. Momo pounces on him and knocks him down. Cut to Pakku and Katara who wear similar expressions of disdain. Master Pakku shakes his head in disgust.

Fade to a frontal view of the city, then cut to a scene above one of the city's many canals. The shot pans down to reveal another bridge. Princess Yue begins to speak from o.c. as she and Sokka enter the frame from the left, Sokka walking on top of the bridge's guard rail. In the background, the song Iroh sung in "The Waterbending Master" plays slowly in the background.)

Princess Yue: So they don't have palaces in the Southern Tribe?
Sokka (stopping and sitting down on the rail): Are you kidding? I grew up in a block of ice. It's not exactly a cultural hub.

(Yue laughs with a warm smile, and puts her hand on Sokka's shoulder. After a moment she pulls back and looks at him seriously.)

Princess Yue: Sokka, this is wrong.
Sokka: What's wrong? We're taking a walk!
Princess Yue: I'm engaged. It just... feels...

(Sokka's smile wanes as she begins to walk away, but the smile returns as he gets an idea.)

Sokka: I know what you need! (He hops off the rail to stand by her side.) You need to meet my good friend Appa!
Princess Yue: Who?

(Cut to an overhead shot of Sokka and Yue entering Appa's pen. He is eating from an enormous pile of greenery in front of him. Cut to a side view of Sokka opening his arms to Appa, who is o.c. in front of him.)

Sokka: Appa and I go way back. Don't we boy?

(The thunder of Appa's shifting bulk is heard and Sokka's features turn to surprise. Appa enters from the left and pins him down with his forepaws).

Sokka: Ahh! Easy!

(Appa licks him from bottom to top – twice.)

Sokka: Down boy! Ahh! No! Up!
Princess Yue (laughingly): Looks like you haven't been giving Appa enough attention.

(Sokka struggles to try and free himself from Appa's embrace. Cut to Sokka and Yue in Appa's saddle.)

Princess Yue: So how does this work?
Sokka: You hangin' on tight?
Princess Yue: Mmm hmm.
Sokka: Yip... (Cut to a close up of Sokka's face) ...yip!

(Appa soars into the nearly cloudless sky.)

Princess Yue: Oh...my...goodness!

(Cut to an overhead shot of the city and the waters outside the main city gate. Appa flies effortlessly through the frame.)

Princess Yue: Wow! (Blushing slightly) I can't believe you do this every day!
Sokka (stretching): Yeh, we pretty much live up here.
Princess Yue (hugging herself): Is it always this cold in the sky?

(She snuggles up against Sokka.)

Sokka: Not when you're with someone.

(Cut to a close of Yue looking at Sokka, her cheeks blushing.)

Princess Yue: It's beautiful up here.
Sokka: Yeh.

(Pause while they look at each other with adoration. They come close to kissing before they break off. The camera zooms out.)

Sokka: Whoo! Yeh! Good times! Good times!

(Around them, what looks like snowflakes begin to fall.)

Sokka (pointing down): Hey, look!

(Cut to a side view of Appa as he flies into a squall of these "snowflakes". Strangely, most of these "snowflakes" are black.)

Princess Yue: What's happening?
Sokka (looking ahead o.c.): Oh no.

(The music becomes foreboding as the scene cuts to an overhead shot of the city, where the black snow is now falling everywhere. Cut a view from inside the city as citizens pause to regard the ash falling from the sky. Cut to Aang laughing as he rolls around in a circle in the snow. Momo is nearby. Within a few seconds ash starts to fall around him, but he doesn't notice. Momo sticks out his tongue, catches some ash and eats it. He spits it out as Aang rolls back into the frame. Aang notices the ash and looks up, Katara now visible in the background doing the same. Cut to a view of Master Pakku and a few other city dwellers near a fountain looking up at the ash. Scene shift again to a close up of a hand picking up some of the ash on the ground.)

Sokka (voice over): Soot.

(Cut to a wide shot of Sokka kneeling on the ground, the ash and snow still in his hand, Yue and Appa in the background.)

Princess Yue: What?
Sokka: I've seen it before. Right before my village was attacked. It's soot mixed with snow.

(Sokka stands.)

Princess Yue: But why?
Sokka: It's the Fire Nation. They've closed in on the North Pole. And from the looks of the stuff...

(Cut to a wide shot of Sokka and Yue looking over the ocean horizon, which is darkened by a dense grey cloud.)

Sokka: ...I'd say there's a lot of them.

(Cut to a shot of the prows of three Fire Navy vessels cutting through the waves.)

Zhao (voice over): This will truly be one for the history books, General Iroh.

(Cut to Iroh and Zhao on the bridge of Zhao's flagship.)

Zhao: Just think, centuries from now, people will study the great Admiral Zhao who destroyed the last of the Water Tribe civilization. You're lucky you're here to see it.
Iroh: Be careful what you wish for, Admiral. History is not always kind to its subjects.
Zhao: I suppose you speak from experience? But rest assured, this will be nothing like your legendary failure at Ba-Sing-Se.
Iroh: I hope not, for your sake.
Zhao: Tell the Captains to prepare for first strike.

(Iroh turns and walks away. Cut to a quick shot of the ornate prow of Zhao's ship cutting through the icy waters, then cut back to Iroh and Zuko, still in his guard disguise, in a hallway on Zhao's ship.)

Iroh (whispering): We'll be landing soon. Do you have a plan?
Zuko (removing his mask): I'm working on it, Uncle.

(Zuko replaces his mask and they split up. Cut to a shot within the Water City, as the feet of Water Tribe warriors run across the screen, then cut to a shot of two Water Tribe men striking a gong with alternating strokes on top of one of the city's buildings. The gong has symbols representing both the moon and the ocean on it. The scene shifts rapidly to show many city dwellers running up the steps of the citadel, including (briefly) Master Pakku and Sokka, Yue in tow. The Princess stops, bringing Sokka to a halt along with her.)

Sokka: What's wrong? (Pointing up to the citadel) We have to go!
Princess Yue (releasing his grip on her hand): No, Sokka, wait. I can't see you anymore. Not at all.
Sokka (turning in surprise): What? We're just friends.
Princess Yue: I wish we could just be friends, but I like you too much and it's too confusing to be around you. I'm marrying someone else.
Sokka: You don't love him, do you? You don't even seem to like him.
Princess Yue: But I do love my people.
Sokka: You're not marrying them.
Princess Yue: You don't understand. I have duties to my father, to my tribe. (Running off screen, basrely holding back tears) I have to do this, goodbye!

(Cut to a close up of Sokka, looking distraught at Yue's sudden departure. The scene then shifts to a front shot of Chief Arnook beginning a speech to a group of Water Tribe warriors. His voice echoes through the great hall as he speaks. Behind him sit Princess Yue and Master Pakku. On the floor, their backs to a nearby wall, sit Aang, Katara and Sokka.)

Chief Arnook: The day we have feared for so long has arrived. The Fire Nation is on our doorstep. It is with great sadness I call my family here before me, knowing well that some of these faces are about to vanish from our tribe. But they will never vanish from our hearts. Now, as we approach the battle for our existence, (he raises his arms up to the heavens in supplication) I call upon the great spirits! Spirit of the Ocean! Spirit of the Moon! Be with us! (Lowering his arms and continuing his address) I'm going to need volunteers for a dangerous mission.
Sokka (standing up): Count me in.
Katara: Sokka!

(Many other men stand up in the crowd with him.)

Chief Arnook: Be warned. Many of you will not return. Come forward to receive my mark if you accept the task.

(The men form a line in front of the Chief to receive his mark. It is three red lines on the forehead, made from some paint or ink that the Chief holds in a bowl in front of him. Sokka is the second in line. As Sokka leaves, he turns and makes eye contact with Yue before he turns again and walks away. Yue begins to cry silently as the string instrumental from General Iroh's song plays softly.

Fade to a shot of Aang sitting on one of the pylons at the top of the citadel steps. He is looking out over the city walls to the ocean horizon in the distance. Behind him the Chief approaches.)

Chief Arnook: The stillness before battle is unbearable. (Katara walks up behind Aang to his left) Such a quite dread.
Aang: I wasn't there when the Fire Nation attacked my people. (Cut to a close up of Aang, a fierce expression on his face.) I'm gonna make a difference this time.

(Cut to shot from behind Aang. He stands up on top of the pylon, Katara to his left and the Chief to his right. The camera zooms up towards and into the corona of the sun.

Shift to a frontal shot of the city from the water. All looks calm and quiet on a beautiful sunny day. Cut to a slanted shot of a row of Water Tribe warriors who line the top of the city wall, their faces painted for war. The shot cuts to pan left across the wall, revealing a solid line of warriors, with Aang atop Appa in the center. Katara and Sokka stand to Appa's left. Cut to a profile shot of Sokka, Katara and Aang in the background, all looking out to sea with expressions of fierce determination. In the distance a single ship is seen. It launches a fireball which hurtles directly at the center of the city wall. It strikes the water symbol in the center of wall and blows a massive hole through it. Many defenders are blown backwards into the city by the concussion, along with huge chunks of ice and debris. Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(The shows returns to a shot of another fireball once flying through the air towards the city. It lands in a canal with an explosion of smoke, water and fire. Cut to a shot of the Fire Nation crew launching another fireball from the trebuchet on the approaching ship's foredeck. It strikes the right side of the city wall, shattering a piece of it. Appa recoils and roars as the smoke and exploding ice create havoc around him.)

Aang: Yip! Yip!

(Appa and Aang launch off the wall towards the Fire Navy ship while the defenders on the wall try to reorganize. Cut to Sokka searching among the wreckage of the ruined wall.)

Sokka: Katara!?

(He walks behind a large mound of snow which begins to move. A large chunk of the snow mound blows out of the screen as Katara waterbends it away to release herself. Sokka helps her to her feet just in time to see two more fireballs come over the city wall.

Cut to Appa roaring in the sky, Aang at his reigns, a stern look on his face. As Aang and Appa approach the Fire Navy ship it fires a few more fireballs at them. The last Aang bats out of the with his staff. The blow changes the trajectory of the fireball and it goes wild, harmlessly striking the ice cliff way to the left of the city.

Cut back to Aang.)

Aang: I'll take it from here, boy!

(Appa begins to invert himself allowing Aang to just fall of the saddle into a free fall. Appa exits the frame as Aang continues his drop. After a few seconds he opens his glider and closes in on the ship. Dodging several more fireballs Aang arrives on the foredeck, breaking the rest of his fall by using his staff as a helicopter blade. Once he lands, he whips up a gale that blows much of the deck crew off the screen. Aang then hops up onto the arm of the loaded trebuchet and begins to walk down it. A huge Fire Nation soldier blocks his way, however, and he is forced back up the arm. Two more soldiers have climbed the trebuchet, however, and appear behind Aang. They all swing mighty hammers at him and miss, damaging the trebuchet. Finally, Aang jets into the air and with a mighty blow blasts the trebuchet into a dozen pieces.

Aang runs over to the other trebuchet on the deck. He breaks the chain the stops the trebuchet arm from overextending and then fires the trebuchet. The arm overextends and the weapon shoot its fireball into the deck, straight through the forepeak and into the water below. Aang runs back up the deck to two more trebuchet, Fire Nation guards in tow. He ties the chains of two trebuchets together in a bow knot. He then runs over to one of the machines firing mechanisms and kicks it into operation. The activated trebuchet draws the one it is tied to across the deck towards itself. When the one strikes the other they disintegrate into a pile of useless junk.

Aang grins widely as he runs over to another trebuchet and is observed by a large Fire Nation warrior. He about to strike the firing mechanism with a hammer when he sees the warrior approach. Aang drops the hammer in fear, narrowly avoiding multiple hammers attached to chains that attempt to strike him from o.c. Cut to the warrior wielding the chained hammers as weapons. Hiding behind one of the trebuchet's girders, Aang is quickly ensnared by two chains which rap around him. Cut to the warrior controlling the chains. Appa's feet suddenly swoop into the frame, breaking the chain and sweeping the warrior out of the picture. Aang frees himself from his now loose chains.)

Aang: Appa!

(Cut to Appa peering over the side of a ship. He ejects the chain warrior overboard with a grunt and a shove of his paw. Aang runs over and jumps onto Appa's forehead, bear hugging him.)

Aang: Thanks for the rescue, buddy!

(Suddenly the ship starts to vibrate violently. A huge spear of ice breaks through the foredeck straight into the sky. Cut to a view of the port side hull which is now encased in rapidly expanding ice. The Fire Navy ship has been surrounded by Water Tribe skiffs full of waterbenders. Together they the Fire Navy ship out of the water on a bed of ice. Appa and Aang take off the now heavily listing deck. As Aang and Appa rise above the now wrecked ship, Aang's expression turns to horror and surprise as he looks in front of him. Cut to a view from behind Appa and Aang. The horizon is full of Fire Navy ships as far as the eye can see.)

Aang: You have got to be kidding me.

(Cut to a quick shot of Water Tribe warriors walking up stairs, then to a headshot of Chief Arnook once again addressing a group of soldiers.)

Chief Arnook: Men, you'll be infiltrating the Fire Nation navy. That means you'll all need one of these uniforms...

(Cut to a shot of someone walking into an empty frame from the waist down wearing what appears to be a Fire Navy uniform. The screen pans up to reveal Hahn, an arrogant looking, dark haired young man. The uniform he wears, while clearly of the Fire Nation, is not current standard issue. In particular, the shoulder armor has wings that curve upward. Laughter from o.c. is heard, then switch to a wide shot of the assembly to reveal that it is Sokka who is laughing. He puts his hand over his mouth. The other warriors turn to look at him.)

Hahn: What's your problem?
Sokka (pointing at him): Fire Navy uniforms don't look like that.
Hahn: Of course they do. These are real uniforms captured from actual Fire Navy soldiers.
Sokka: When, like a hundred years ago?
Chief Arnook: Eighty five.
Sokka (walking forward): The Fire Nation doesn't wear shoulder spikes anymore. The newer uniforms are more streamlined.

(Sokka bends the tip of one of the shoulder spikes back with the tip of his finger and lets get out. It bounces back to its original shape with a little comic sound effect.)

Hahn (to Arnook): How do we know we can trust this guy? (To Sokka, leaning into him with a threatening expression) Such bold talk for a new recruit.
Chief Arnook: Sokka is from our sister tribe, Hahn, he is a capable warrior and I value his input.

(The camera zooms backward from Arnook to show Sokka looking smugly at Hahn, who is none too pleased. Cut to a profile shot of the assembly as Arnook turns back to finish his address.)

Chief Arnook: Now, our first objective is to determine the identity of their commanding officer.
Sokka: His name is Zhao. Middle-aged. Big sideburns. Bigger temper.
Chief Arnook: Sokka, I want you to tell everything you know to Hahn, he is leading this mission. Hahn, show Sokka your respect. I expect nothing less from my future son-in-law.

(Arnook exits left as Hahn pushes his hair back over his ears. The screen pans right to reveal that Sokka's jaw has dropped in shock at the Chief's last pronouncement. He recovers and points an accusing finger at hahn.)

Sokka: Princess Yue's marrying you?
Hahn: Yeh, what of it?
Sokka (turning away): Nothing, congratulations.

(Cut to a late afternoon or sunset shot of the advancing ranks of Fire Navy ships firing volleys of fireballs towards the city. Some land inside the city and some hit the outer wall. Cut to Master Pakku in front of a group of waterbenders.)

Master Pakku: Stop those fireballs!

(As a fireball bears down on them, they collectively raise up a barrier of water and freeze as the fireball impacts. It is extinguished. Cut to a view of Zhao's back as he watches the bombardment from the bridge of his flagship. Iroh enters the frame.)

Iroh: It's almost twilight, Admiral. As your military consultant I must advise you to halt your attack. The waterbenders draw their power from the moon and it is nearly full tonight. You should wait and resume the attack at daybreak.
Zhao: Oh, I'm well aware of the moon problem and I am working on a solution. But for now, daybreak it is.

(Cut to a shot of the front rank of Fire Navy ships dropping anchors for the night, then to an overhead of the fleet parked outside the Water City's main wall. Zhao's ship is in the second line of ships and looks double the size of the others. Shift to a shot from behind Katara and Yue, who are standing in front of the citadel looking out over the city and its walls to the line of threatening Fire Navy ships. Plumes of smoke rise over several sections of the city that have been bombed.)

Princess Yue: They've stopped firing.

(Appa swoops into the frame.)

Katara (pointing at them): Aang!

(Appa lands on the plaza at the base of the Citadel steps. Yue and Katara run down to them. As Appa lands he lies down on his belly, his feet too tired to keep him up. Aang looks small and dejected in the saddle. He slides off and comes to rest next to Appa's left forepaw.)

Aang: I can't do it. (Putting his hands to his head.) I can't do it.
Katara: What happened?
Aang: I must have taken out a dozen Fire Navy ships, but there's just too many of them. I can't fight them all.
Princess Yue: But, you have to! You're the Avatar!
Aang: I'm just one kid.

(He buries his head in his arms in despair as Katara sits down to comfort him.

Cut to a shot of the nearly full moon as the screen pans down to reveal Zhao's command ship, then cut again to Zuko, now out of uniform entirely dressed instead in plain grey clothes, preparing a canoe to be lowered into the water. Behind him a door opens to reveal Iroh entering. He shuts the door behind him.)

Iroh: If you're fishing for an octopus, my nephew, you need a tightly woven net or he will squeeze through the tiniest hole and escape.
Zuko: I don't need your wisdom right now, Uncle.
Iroh: I'm sorry, I just nag you because, well, ever since I lost my son...

(Iroh looks away, pain evident on his face. The camera focuses on Zuko in the foreground, whose image had been fuzzy as Iroh spoke.)

Zuko: Uncle, you don't have to say it.
Iroh: I think of you as my own.

(Zuko turns to him, a genuine look of concern and understanding on his face.)

Zuko: I know, Uncle. (He bows and salutes him with his arm over chest.) We'll meet again...

(Iroh rushes forward and gives him a bear hug.)

Zuko (releasing his Uncle and walking over to the canoe): ...after I have the Avatar.

(He gets into the canoe and begins to lower it to the water.)

Iroh: Remember your Breathe of Fire! It could save your life out there!
Zuko: I will.
Iroh: And put your hood up, keep your ears warm!
Zuko (now far below his uncle): I'll be fine.

(Cut to a shot of Iroh looking worried as he watches his nephew depart, then a wide shot of the city and the line of Fire Navy ships between Zuko and his goal.

This scene is replaced by a shot of a close up of Sokka's hands sharpening an axe blade on a rotating wheel. It is clear he is applying too much pressure to the blade for some reason causing speaks to fly off the blade. Cut to a wider shot of Sokka and Hahn performing the same task side by side. No sparks fly from Hahn's blade. Sokka's expression is clearly unhappy.)

Hahn (mispronouncing Sokka's name): Let me tell ya, Soka, I've courted a lot of girls, but Yue is the finest – and she comes with the most perks.
Sokka (his eyes bulging in anger): Perks!? What does that mean?
Hahn: I mean, Yue's nice and everything, but the points I'll get with the Chief aren't bad either.
Sokka: Princess Yue is wasted on a self absorbed weasel like you!
Hahn: Whoa. Hang on. What do you care? You're just a simple rube from the Southern Tribe. What would you know of the political complexities of our life? No offense.

(Sokka yells in anger and tackles Hahn to the ground. Sokka ends up on top and punches Hahn in the face.)

Sokka: You're just a jerk without a soul! No offense!

(They roll around a bit more before Chief Arnook's hands appear in the frame to break them up.)

Chief Arnook: That's enough! Sokka, you're off the mission.

(The Chief exits again as Sokka looks away, humiliated.)

Hahn (to the assembled soldiers): All right, fall in men! Everybody listen to what I say and we'll take out this Admiral Jo in no time.
Sokka (to the backs of Hahn and his departing soldiers): It's Admiral Zhao!

(Cut to a night shot of Zuko navigating his canoe through the ice flows near the City. He is wrapped up in his grey garb. Nearby, turtle seals can be heard making noise. He floats silently near the damaged city wall, unseen by the sentries patrolling atop the damaged barrier. He beaches the craft on the ice near the wall and spies several turtle seals disappearing into a hole in the ice.)

Zuko: Where are they going? They're coming up for air somewhere...

(He takes off his veil, takes a deep breath and plunges into the icy water.

Cut to a view of the nearly full moon.)

Princess Yue (voice over): The legends say the moon was the first waterbender. (The camera view zooms backward to reveal Katara, Aang and Yue looking at the moon over the city from a room in the citadel. Aang's holds his head low.) Our ancestors saw how it pushed and pulled the tides and learned how to do it themselves.
Katara: I've always noticed my waterbending is stronger at night.
Princess Yue: Our strength comes from the Spirit of the Moon, our life comes from the Spirit of the Ocean. They work together to keep balance.
Aang (his eyes opening wide as he gets an idea): The Spirits! Maybe I can find them and get their help!
Princess Yue: How can you do that?
Katara: The Avatar is the bridge between our world and the Spirit World. Aang can talk to them!
Princess Yue (smiling hopefully): Maybe they'll give you the wisdom to win this battle!
Aang (spreading his arms wide): Or, maybe they'll unleash a crazy amazing spirit attack on the Fire Nation!

(Cut to a wide shot of the three, as Yue and Katara regard Aang steadily. Aang puts his arms behind his back and smiles.)

Aang: Or wisdom. That's good too.
Katara: The only problem is, last time you got to the Spirit World by accident. How are you going to get there this time?
Princess Yue: I have an idea, follow me.

(Princess Yue walks into the camera. Cut to a view of the three walking through a courtyard behind the citadel. Yue stops in front of a wooden half height door.)

Aang: So is this the way to the Spirit World?
Princess Yue (laughing): No, you'll have to get there on your own. (Opening the door) But I can take you to the most spiritual place in the entire North Pole.

(Aang enters as Momo jumps off his shoulder and onto Katara. Cut to Aang's p.o.v. Inside there is a long pool of water. At the back of the chamber is a waterfall coming from the glacier way above. On the sides of the pool are two ledges by which one can access the landing at the back of the chamber. The landing is filled with green foliage, another smaller pool that looks almost tropical in nature, and a small t shaped gate like structure very much akin to a Chinese paifang or perhaps a Japanese torii. The landing is connected to the ledges on the side of the chamber by two wooden foot bridges. Cut to a zoom in close up of Aang's face, filled with wonder at the nature beauty before him before cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(The show returns to a shot of Aang running over the left bridge, laughing. He lands on the soft grass in front of the little pond. He rubs it fondly.)

Aang: I never thought I'd miss grass this much!

(He flops over on his back as Yue and Katara walk onto the landing themselves.)

Katara (smiling): It's so warm here! How is that possible? (She takes off her overcoat.)
Princess Yue: It's the center of all spiritual energy in our land.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the pond where two fish circle each other in a timeless motion. One is white, the other black. Momo skitters up to the pond and begins to try and grab the fish. Yue and Katara look severely at Momo, who decides to run away.)

Aang: You're right, Yue. I can feel...something...it's so...tranquil.

(Aang sits cross legged in front of the pond. He closes his eyes, makes two fists and puts his knuckles together in an attempt to meditate. Fade to white, then cut to a dark cave filled with the sounds of turtle seals. Another water hole is seen, its surface quickly broken by an out of breath Prince Zuko. He flops onto the ice floor of the cave, his breath making clouds of water vapor in front of him. He flips over, shiver, and blows fire into his hands to warm him up. He gets up.)

Zuko (to the noisy turtles): Be quiet!

(They stop barking as he walks by, but begin once he passes. Zuko approaches a waterfall at the back of the cave. He enters the tunnel where the water is coming out. Screen fades to white as he makes headway up the tunnel. Cut to Sokka sharpening his boomerang in the same armory he had the fight with Hahn. Arnook comes up behind him.)

Chief Arnook: Is something wrong, Sokka?
Sokka: Oh no! Hahn's out there on the top secret mission while I'm here sharpening my boomerang. Everything's fine!
Chief Arnook: Listen to me. I took you off the mission for selfish reasons. I have a special task in mind for you.
Sokka (turning to the Chief in anger): What? You want me to scrub the barracks?
Chief Arnook: I want you to guard my daughter, Princess Yue.
Sokka (getting up, an look of innocence mingled with desire on his face): Er, sure. That shouldn't be too hard.

(Arnook exits, fade to white. Cut back to Zuko forcing himself up the tunnel. He slips once, but keeps on moving. Finally he exits the tunnel into the bottom of a large pool of water. He swims up and breaks the surface, gasping for air. The top of the chamber is inches above his head. He regains his breathe, then looks just underneath the water line to scan for exits. He sees one, dives and enters another tunnel. Going around one bend and then up reveals what looks like an exit into open air, but when he reaches it, it proves to be just thinner, lighter colored ice. Running out of breath, he concentrates and superheats his hands to red hot and places them on the thin ice. He burns through it and emerges into an ice tunnel within the Water Tribe City. He lies down for a moment to regain his strength.

Cut to Aang still in his meditation pose beside the pool, Katara and Yue behind him. The camera slowly zooms in on Aang.)

Princess Yue (trying to whisper): Why is he sitting like that?
Katara (also whispering): He's meditating – trying to cross over into the Spirit World. It takes all his concentration.

(Aang cracks an eye at this continued interruption.)

Princess Yue: Is there any way we can help?

(The camera zooms back out to its original position.)

Aang: How 'bout some quiet!? (Turning to look at them, Katara putting a hand over her mouth.) C'mon guys! I can hear every word you're saying!

(He resumes his pose. Cut to an overhead shot of Aang, the black and white fish circling each other in front of him. The view switches from underneath the fish. Aang stares at them. As he looks at them they blur into the Yin – Yang symbol. His eyes and then a second later the screen flashes white. When the view returns, Aang's eyes and head arrow glow white.)

Princess Yue: Is he okay?
Katara: He's crossing into the Spirit World. He'll be fine as long as we don't move his body. That's his way back to the physical world.
Princess Yue (beginning to walk away): Maybe we should get some help?
Katara: No, he's my friend. I'm perfectly capable of protecting him.
Zuko (voice over, his voice echoing slightly in the chamber): Well, aren't you a big girl now?
Katara (turning to the voice): No!

(Cut to Zuko walking over the footbridge towards them.)

Zuko: Yes! Hand him over, and I won't have to hurt you.

(Cut to Katara assuming a waterbending stance, while Yue runs off in the background. Aang, oblivious, still communes with the Spirit World in front of the pond.

Zuko launches forward, firing several blasts of fire. Katara blocks all three with water from the pond. He fires several more as he advances, but on the last one she uses enough water to not only douse his fire, but hurl him backward and lay him flat on the ground.)

Zuko (getting up): I see you've learned a new trick. But I didn't come this far to lose to you.

(He fires another blast which she blocks. Katara then launches another stream of water at him, hurling him backwards again. He barely retains his balance, but Katara freezes the water beneath him. His feet are frozen in the ice. Then, with a massive output of effort, Katara raises a churning sphere of water from the main pool behind Zuko, encases him in it, and freezes him entirely. Cut to an accent close up of Katara's face – satisfaction written all over it. Cut back to Zuko in the ice.)

Zuko (voice muffled by the ice): You little peasant. You've found a master, haven't you?

(As Zuko ends his comment, the ground begins to shake and the ice begins to glow yellow and orange. With an explosion of fire, the shell of ice shatters, releasing Zuko who promptly charges Katara. They trade shots which miss. Zuko gets behind Katara and almost grabs Aang's collar, but Katara blasts him out of the way with a jet of water. He gets blown over to the right ledge. While he tries to recover, Katara raises a huge wave of water that raises him to ten or more feet up the wall. She freezes him in place once again.

Cut to a close up of Master Pakku. The sun rises over the horizon, lighting his face. Cut to a shot from behind him and two of his waterbenders. They look out from the citadel over the city wall to the Fire Navy fleet. Cut to a shot from behind Zhao.)

Zhao: It's daybreak at last. Let's write history.

(A close up of Zhao's face is replaced by a shot of Zuko still frozen in the ice. His head droops in defeat. As the sunlight reaches him, though, his head snaps up with a look of determination. He breathes steam, melting the ice holding him in place. He slides down and charges Katara again. He fires a huge blast of fire. Katara, caught off guard while she walking back to Aang, blocks it only partially. She is thrown back into the post of the paifang gate and is knocked out. When the smoke clears, Zuko looks over her, his hand on Aang's collar, the sun shining bright in the background.)

Zuko: You rise with the moon. I rise with the sun.

(Cut to the prow of a Fire Navy ship dropping its bowsprit and using it to slice open the Water City's main wall. The bowsprit is then used as a bridge by Fire Nation troops entering the city, much as the ancient Roman corvus was used. Cut to a close up of Zhao's eyes.)

Zhao: The Water Tribe can try to resist the inevitable (cut to a wider shot of him and Iroh), but their city will fall today.

(Cut back to Katara, emerging from her involuntary nap. Here eyes open suddenly, and she gets to her knees with a start. Cut to an overhead shot of her and the pond. Aang and Zuko are gone. Momo chitters and runs across the screen.)

Katara (shouting): Aang!

(Cut to side, wide shot of the sanctuary. Appa lands, Sokka and Yue in the saddle. They move to hop down.)

Sokka: What happened? Where's Zuko?
Katara (sadly): He took Aang. He took him right out from under me.
Sokka (voice over as we see a shot of Momo looking back at them from his perch on the side of the pond): Where did they go?

(The shot pans up and out of the protected valley of the sanctuary to the surface of the massive glacier above. Up there it is snowing hard. Zuko struggles through the storm, carrying Aang, whose marking still glow white. The disappear into the snow, fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Opening shot of four massive fireballs arcing over the Water City walls and into the city. It is daylight and the battle for the survival of the Northern Water Tribe has begun in earnest. Cut to an overhead shot from behind the citadel. The four fireballs land at various points within the city and explode. The camera pans back to the sanctuary, where Appa and the others are. Cut to a close up shot of the black and white fish circling each other in the sanctuary pond. Katara begins to speak from o.c. at first, then cut to wide shot of her, Yue, Sokka, Momo and Appa. Katara is kneeling at the pool.)

Katara: I can't believe I lost him.
Sokka: You did everything you could and now we need to do everything we can to get him back.

(Sokka leads Yue over to Appa. Cut to a shot of Katara's back. She turns to look at her brother o.c., tears brimming over her eyes.)

Sokka (continuing from o.c.) : Zuko can't have gotten far. We'll find him. Aang's gonna be fine.
Katara (getting up): Okay.

(She walks by Momo, who looks out over the pond. He chitters softly and sadly. Cut to Katara now standing atop Appa, Sokka at the reigns, Yue beside her.)

Katara: It's all right. You stay here, Momo, in case Aang comes back.
Sokka: Yip! Yip!

(Appa launches himself into the air and out of the sanctuary into the frozen, snowing wasteland above. Cut to Appa flying over the ice dunes, the snowing coming down hard from the dark, gray sky.

Shift to a long trail in the snow that goes to the horizon, then cut to a shot of Zuko's feet tramping through the drifting snow, Aang's feet dragging behind him. After a few shots of Zuko dragging him through the blizzard, the shot cuts to a close up of Aang's face. His eyes are closed, but his tattoo arrow on his head glows white. The screen flashes white for an instant.

When the picture returns, it is of a split second close up of Aang's face. The camera almost instantly zooms backward to show sitting cross legged on a platform in the middle of a bamboo swamp. He is in a meditative pose as his eyes open. Cut to a long shot of Aang sitting on the platform amidst the swamp. A white bird flies by in an instant. Aang gets up and runs off the platform Cut to a shot of Aang's upper body as he looks around the swamp. Behind him is a small island. A temple like structure, like the one behind the pond in the Water Tribe sanctuary, but thicker and cruder, rests on top of the small island. Underneath the cross bar of the structure a figure sits cross-legged.)

Mystical Monkey: Ohmm... Ohmmmm...

(Aang hears the chanting and runs up the island to the see a white haired monkey sitting in meditative repose. He wears a brown monk's shawl.)

Aang: Hello? I'm sorry to disturb you, but I just really need to find the Moon and the Ocean spirits.
Mystical Monkey (without opening his eyes): Go... away.

(He pauses for a moment, then opens one eye at Aang.)

Mystical Monkey: You're still here?
Aang: Yes! I need –
Mystical Monkey (shutting his eyes tightly): Ohmm!! Ohmmm!

(A blue will-o'-the-wisp enters from the right, emitting a slight crystalline noise.)

Mystical Monkey: Perhaps that thing will help you? Chase it!

(Aang runs after it. The mystical monkey keeps his eyes shut for a second more, then opens one to confirm Aang's departure. He shakes his head.)

Mystical Monkey (sighing): Finally!

(Cut to Aang chasing the will-o'-the-wisp through the swamp. He chases it up a tree and out onto a large branch. He catches it, a huge smile on his face. As he does, the tree branch liquefies underneath him and he falls, screaming, to the water below and lands with a splash. As he lies in the water the will-o'-the-wisp gets away from him.)

Aang (getting up): Come back!

(He moves to follow the will-o'-the-wisp, but stops to look at the water. As the ripples from the splash dissipate an image forms where his own reflection should be. It is Avatar Roku.)

Avatar Roku: Hello, Aang.
Aang: Roku!

(The screen flashes white and returns with a shot of Zuko carrying Aang through the snow. After some steps, the ice underneath Zuko begins to crack and cave in. Within a few seconds most of the ground around him is collapsing. He begins to run with Aang on his back. He manages to keep just ahead of the yawning hole that his footsteps over thin ice have caused to appear. The hole finally stops expanding as Zuko trips and falls. They are now on the lip of a newly formed canyon. He looks ahead to see a rock ledge overhanging a small cave.)

Zuko: Shelter!

(Cut to a shot from inside the cave. Zuko appears, dragging Aang inside by the collar. Outside the blizzard continues. He dumps him at the back of the cave and ties his hands behind his back with some of the rope he is carrying. Cut to a zoom in close up shot of Aang, his tattoo aglow. The screen flashes white and when it returns we once again see Aang looking down at the reflection in the water of the Spirit World swamp.)

Aang: Roku, the Water Tribe is under attack. I need to find the Ocean and Moon spirits!

(Cut to a profile shot of Aang looking at the water. Suddenly, maroon colored water fountains up and solidifies into the shape of Avatar Roku.)

Avatar Roku: The Ocean and the Moon are ancient spirits. They crossed over from the Spirit World to the Mortal World very near the beginning. There is only one spirit I know of who is old enough to remember.
Aang: Who?
Avatar Roku: The spirit's name is Koh. But he is very dangerous. They call him... the Face Stealer.

(Cut to close up of Aang looking shocked and frightened. Then cut back to an overhead shot of the two.)

Avatar Roku: When you speak with him you must be very careful to show no emotion at all – not the slightest expression or he will steal your face!

(Aang forces the fear from his face and nods to Roku stoically.

The screen flashes white and we return to the frozen wastes where the blizzard rages. Appa's forepaw enters the picture and slams deep into the snow. He rumbles. Cut to Sokka looking out over the canyon created by Zuko and Aang's passage. He turns around to look at Katara, her eyes wide with concern and fear. She lowers her face, fearing the worst.

A long shot of Appa and the others is quickly replaced by one of Zuko blowing fire into his hands to keep warm. He looks over at Aang.)

Zuko: I finally have you. But I can't get you home because of this blizzard. (He walks over to the cave entrance to look out at the falling snow, his back to the camera) There's always something. Not that you would understand. You're like my sister. Everything always...came easy to her. She's a firebending prodigy – and everyone adores her. (Cut to a frontal view of Zuko) My father says she was born lucky. He says I was lucky to be born. (Cut to view of his back again.) I don't need luck though, I don't want it. I've always had to struggle and fight and that's made me strong. It's made me who I am.

(Cut to a shot of Fire Nation assault on the city below. A line of Fire Navy ships abuts the outer wall, which continue launching fireballs deep into the unoccupied portions of the city. The shot pans left to reveal that the invaders have penetrated the outer wall with infantry and armor. The Water Tribe still holds one of the towers in the foreground, but it is clear the defenders are losing this battle.

Cut to a close up shot of a couple Fire Nation war rhinoceros, each with small catapults on either side of its saddle. One after the other the soldiers on the rhinoceros fire their catapults.

The scene shifts again to a wide shot covering the middle half of the city where the secondary wall still holds, a thin moat of water in front of it. The defenders are few, however, and a deadly rain of fireballs enters the frame, spreading destruction deep inside the city. Cut to a close up of rank upon rank of Fire Nation tanks, firing as they advance toward the secondary wall.

The defenders rally atop the secondary wall, where a line of waterbenders returns fire. Right under the top of the wall is a line of portholes through which water pours into the moat below. The waterbenders motion in unison and the gentle streams become mighty jets of water. Two tanks are washed away, but several others behind them fire massive grappling hooks into the secondary wall. The hooks penetrate the wall clear through to the other side as the waterbenders scatter. The tanks with the grappling hooks then begin to reel back on the lines. The tanks are anchored in the ice to prevent the tank from just hauling itself to the wall. The wall cracks slowly, then gives way as more fireballs fly overhead. A huge breach has been opened, revealing a war rhinoceros and other infantry ready to pour through.

Cut to a wide shot from the p.o.v. of the outer wall. Three more tanks on the left pull down large sections of the secondary wall. The space in between the primary and secondary walls is brimming with Fire Nation soldiers, tanks and rhinoceros. Numerous fireballs have landed in the residential section beyond and parts of the city are on fire.

The scene shifts to show the ornate prow of Zhao's flagship and the other surrounding vessels.)

Iroh (voice over): I don't need to remind you we have a time limit. (Cut to Iroh standing next to Zhao on the bridge's observation deck) If we don't defeat the Water Tribe before the full moon rises they will be undefeatable.
Zhao (smiling evilly): I assure you I have everything under control. I intend to remove the moon as a factor.
Iroh (incredulously): Remove the moon!? How?
Hahn (entering from behind, spear in hand): Admiral Choi! (He takes off his helmet and throws it aside.) Prepare to meet your fate!

(He rushes forward to Zhao, who casually throws him overboard. Hahn screams as he falls o.c. and then a loud splash is heard. Iroh looks down and shakes his head, then turns back to Zhao.)

Zhao (ignoring the pathetic assassination attempt): As I was saying...years ago I stumbled upon a great and powerful secret...the identity of the Moon Spirit's mortal form.
Iroh (shocked): What?

(Cut to a close up of Zhao's face in profile. His eyes are closed, a cruel smile on his lips. The screen pans right and fades to the show the memory Zhao begins to describe.)

Zhao: I was a young Lieutenant serving under General Shu in the Earth Kingdom...

(Fade to a long shot of Zhao sitting at a desk in a windowless room, perhaps a basement of some sort as stairs lead up in the foreground. In front of Zhao, the candle on the desk illuminates a map of the middle Earth Kingdom on the wall in front of the desk.)

Zhao: I discovered a hidden library, underground in fact. I tore through scroll after scroll. One of them contained a detailed illustration and the words "moon" and "ocean." I knew then that these spirits could be found – and killed. (The memory ends with a close up of Zhao's eyes, then fade to the present.) And that it was my destiny to do so.
Iroh (angry): Zhao, the Spirits are not to be trifled with!
Zhao (patronizingly): Yes, yes, I know you fear the Spirits, Iroh. I've heard rumors about your journey into the Spirit World. But the Ocean and Moon gave up their immortality to become a part of our world – (cut to a shot behind the two, showing the assault on the city) and now they will face the consequences!

(The screen flashes white again, transitioning back to the Spirit World. Here was see a long shot of Aang hopping across the top of a line of wooden pylons on his way to a huge gnarled tree in the background. The tree is partially silhouetted by a light source behind it that is too dim to be the sun, but too bright to be the moon. Aang stops as a monstrous coyote or other dog like creature passes behind the tree – it must be the size of small mountain. Aang continues his approach to the base of the tree. There is a dark hole at the base of the tree. Aang approaches the hole fearfully. Cut to Aang's p.o.v. as the camera zooms in on the hole, but it stops short as the a monkey's screech is heard. The camera pans left to show a monkey sitting on the root of the tree, looking away from the camera.)

Aang (with relief): Oh! Whew! You're just a curly tailed blue nose.

(Cut back to the monkey, who turns around to reveal that it has no face. Aang starts in fright, then drops all emotion from his face. He breathes deeply.)

Aang (in unison with voice over from Roku): Show no fear. Show no emotion at all.

(Aang walks into the hole, then cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(The show returns to shot of the Koh's tree silhouetted against the unseen backlight. As the shot pans down the scene fades to show Aang descending the staircase into Koh's lair. The lair opening is still seen above, light pouring in through it. The lair is dark, though not the pitch black scene at the entrance. Roots stick out from the ceiling, but no creature stirs.)

Aang: Hello? I'm looking for a spirit named "Koh."

(As Aang says the spirit's name, some "roots" on the ceiling begin to move. Aang looks around, sensing movement, but sees nothing. Cut to a close up of Aang's face, that pans slightly left, leaving the right hand portion of the screen over his shoulder momentarily empty. A moment later a white face appears, with grey patches around its eyes and luscious, blood red lips. The face is vaguely clown like. Cut to a close up of the lips, which smile. Cut to a profile of Aang, his face emotionless. He is prepared. Suddenly, a huge cockroach like body arcs around Aang and appears in front of his face. The white, clown like face of Koh is inches away from Aang. Around the spirit's face are eight legs that are attached to a centipede like body.)

Koh: Welcome!

(Aang's face remains inscrutable. Cut to a long shot. The monster hangs from the ceiling in front of Aang, who bows with his hands clasped in front of him in a gesture of honor.)

Aang: Thank you.

(Koh wheels around Aang to look at him from the back. His voice is low, melodic, almost purring. His voice oozes danger.)

Koh: My old friend, the Avatar. It's been a long time.
Aang: You know me?
Koh (now facing the camera, away from Aang): How could I forget...

(At this moment Koh's face changes from the clown mask to a middle-aged mustached man. This change occurs with a "winking" effect, as if some sort of nictating eyelid or membrane closes briefly over the old face to reveal a new one. It also bears some resemblance to switching slides in a slide projector.)

Koh: ...you! One of your previous incarnations tried (sticking his face right up to Aang's) to slay me! It was eight or nine hundred years ago.
Aang: I didn't know that. Why did he... or I... try to kill you?
Koh: Oh...(his face changes to that of a beautiful, flowing haired young woman) it was something about stealing the face of someone you loved... (the face changes to the curly tailed blue nose face as Koh begins to laugh cruelly). Of course, that's all behind us. Why should I hold a grudge against you for something in a past life? After all, you're a different person now. (Sticking his fanged, monkey face up to Aang's ear from behind him) You've come to me... with a new face.

(Aang closes his eye and breathes. Cut to the Mortal World, where his physical body does the same as his spirit. Zuko looks over at him, then looks out of the cave.)

Zuko: Guess we'll be here awhile.

(A brief shot of the blizzard outside is replaced by the kids flying on Appa, scanning the ground for signs of Zuko and Aang.)

Princess Yue: Don't worry! Prince Zuko can't be getting too far in this weather.
Katara: I'm not worried they'll get away in the blizzard. I'm worried that they won't.
Sokka: They're not gonna die in this blizzard. If we know anything it's that Zuko never gives up. They'll survive – and we'll find them!

(The crystalline sound that signals to the audience that something related to the Spirit World is about to happen resurfaces at the end of Sokka's statement.

The screens flashes white, and we are back to Aang's interview with the sinister Face Stealer. Aang stands on the stairs, Koh wraps his body loosely around him.)

Koh: It's been a long time since I've added a child's face to my collection. (His face is now that of an owl) So... how may I help you?

(During the conversation Koh continues to wrap around Aang, making endless circles.)

Aang: I need to find the Moon and the Ocean.
Koh: Their spirit names are Tui and La. Push... and Pull... and that has been the nature of their relationship for all time.
Aang: Please, help me find them. An entire culture could be destroyed if I don't get their help.

(Cut to Koh's face, which flips to that of an old man, Aang visible below him.)

Koh: Oh, you think you need their help? Actually, it's quite the other way around.

(In an instant, Koh turns and bolts to Aang, pressing his face within inches of Aang's. Koh's face has changed again from the owl to a blue ogre like face with red eyes and huge fangs.)

Koh: Someone's going to kill them!

(Aang closes his eyes briefly, then opens them to look at Koh.)

Aang: What do you mean? How can I find them and protect them?
Koh (flipping back to his white face): You've already met them, actually.

(Cut to a shot from behind Aang, as Koh has reared himself up, so Aang must look up to see his face.)

Koh: Tui and La, your Moon and Ocean, have always circled each other in an eternal dance. They balance each other... push and pull... life and death... good and evil... yin... and yang.

(Aang's eyes open wide, as he gets a flashback of the white and black fish circling each other in the pond and the vision he got of them turning into the yin and yang symbol just before he entered the Spirit World.)

Aang (smiling): The koi fish!

(Koh, hearing the emotion in Aang's voice, appears instantly with his blue ogre face in front of the Avatar, ready to take his face. But no luck – Aang's face is once again a model of impassivity.)

Aang: I must be going now.
Koh (flipping to the face of a bald young man): We'll meet again.

(Koh recedes back into the shadows, then cut to Aang emerging from Koh's lair. He looks down at his reflection on the ground.)

Aang: The spirits are in trouble. I need to get back to the physical world.

(Cut to a view over Aang's shoulder. Avatar Roku is visible on the ground.)

Avatar Roku: A friend is here to guide you back.

(Roku fades to the panda form of Hei-Bai, the forest spirit from "The Spirit World, Winter Solstice Part 1". Aang's turns with a smile.)

Aang: Hei-Bai!

(Cut to a wide shot. Hei-Bai is indeed behind him, reared up on his hind legs. He gets on all fours and Aang jumps onto his neck. Hei-Bai then begins to take Aang back to where he came in.

The screen flashes white and returns the audience to the beleaguered Water City. Night has fallen, but the Fire Nation assault continues unabated. Fire balls now blast the residential section in front of the citadel, which is protected by the third and final wall. The secondary wall has been fully compromised and Fire Nation troops and tanks are pouring through. Water Tribe citizens run through the smoking streets as tanks smash through everything in their path.

A quick shot of the tank assault is replaced by a shot of the massive full moon rising behind the Fire Navy fleet. Drawing strength from the full moon, the defenders manage an uncoordinated counterattack. A group of Fire Nation soldiers corner a waterbender on a foot bridge over a canal, but the waterbender breaks the ice bridge and sends the soldiers flying. Cut to another shot of a tank chasing a waterbender, who turns and melts the ice under the tank. It sinks as the waterbenders damages the turret with a powerful jet of water. Cut to a line of defenders atop the third and final wall. In unison they fire ice daggers at a line of Fire Nation soldiers below who block them with their shields.

Finally, cut to Master Pakku, who squares off alone against three tanks which are closely supported by three infantry platoons. Exercising his mastery over his art, he cuts the treads off all three tanks with jets of ice. As he cripples the Fire Nation armor, the infantry close in around him. With a motion he raises them up and encases them all in ice. Then, mustering all his might, he raises a water tornado, much like Aang used when his Avatar Spirit was activated in "The Avatar Returns." Pakku rides at the pinnacle of the tornado as he brushes aside both fire bolts and Fire Nation soldiers. He is unstoppable.

Cut to another group of waterbenders who raise up a tank on a block of ice and throws it at a group of Fire Nation soldiers on war rhinoceros. Cut to Zhao, a soldier visible over his right soldier. The soldier gets covered in snow from the impact of the tank that was just thrown, but the guard heats the snow and it melts off him in a cloud of steam.)

Zhao: We'll be following this map to a very special location. And when we get there... (cut to a shot of Zhao's head silhouetted by the moon, a cruel smile spreading over his face) ...we're going fishing.

(The screen flashes white again and the crystalline, Spirit World noise is heard. When the image returns, Hei-Bai and Aang run straight at the camera. Cut to a profile shot as they reach the paifang where Aang entered.)

Aang (dismounting): This is where I came in. (He jumps onto the platform underneath the paifang) But how do I get back?

(In response, Hei-Bai rears up on his hind legs and breathes a pulse of blue, spiritual energy out of his mouth at Aang, who freezes, engulfed by the energy and disappears. Cut to the mystical monkey on the ground nearby, still meditating. He opens his eyes to make a comment.)

Mystical Monkey: Good riddance.

(Cut to a wide shot as Hei-Bai, now in his Spirit Monster form, appears beside the grouchy monkey and blows him out of the frame with a blast of spiritual energy. Hei-Bai then transforms back into panda form before the screen goes white again.

When the image returns, Aang is back in the Water City sanctuary, but the blue nimbus around him suggests that he has not returned to his body.)

Aang: Momo!

(He walks over to Momo, sleeping on the ground. He does not stir.)

Aang (looking at his hands): Momo? (Realizing his predicament) Oh no! Where's my body?

(He looks around frantically. He stops as a blue ball of energy forms around and he is lifted or beamed by it right out of the sanctuary valley and out into the wasteland above. Like a comet he arcs over the frozen landscape. He is seen by Katara as he flies over them.)

Katara: Look! That's gotta be Aang!

(Sokka flips Appa's reigns to fly follow the spirit comet. They quickly arrive at the cave where Aang and Zuko have taken refuge. The comet enters the cave, briefly illuminating it from inside. Cut to Aang, still bound on the cave floor. His tattoos stops glowing and Aang wakes up. He struggles briefly against his bonds, then sits up to face Zuko.)

Zuko: Welcome back.
Aang (threateningly): Good to be back.

(With a mighty breath, he blows Zuko against the wall while simultaneously propelling himself out of the cave and into the open. He begins to grunt as he moves forward, caterpillar style, along the ground. Zuko enters the frame and grabs him by the collar and lifts him up.)

Zuko: That won't be enough to escape.

(Appa appears over Zuko's head.)

Aang: Appa!

(Appa lands and Zuko drops Aang in the snow. Katara dismounts Appa to face him again.)

Zuko (assuming a firebending stance): Here for a rematch?
Katara (beginning to waterbend): Trust me, Zuko, it's not going to be much of a match.

(She blocks a fireball that enters the screen just as she finishes her sentence while Sokka and Yue look on from Appa's saddle. She sends a shock wave of ice hurtling towards him. When it reaches Zuko, she encases him in a pillar of ice that she raises up high, then drops. Zuko falls to the ground unconscious. Sokka runs over and cuts Aang's bonds.)

Sokka: Hey! This is some quality rope!
Aang: We need to get to the oasis! The spirits are in trouble!

(Aang gets up and runs to Appa. Both Sokka and Aang get onboard, Aang at the reigns. They are ready to go, but Aang stops and looks over at the Prince.)

Aang: Wait, we can't just leave him here.
Sokka: Sure we can. Let's go.
Aang: No, if we leave him, he'll die.

(Aang jumps down, grabs Zuko and brings back to Appa.)

Sokka: Yeh, this makes a lot of sense. Let's bring the guy who's constantly trying to kill us!

(Appa takes off, then cut back to the black and white fish circling each other in the pool. A pair of hands reaches into the frame. The right one grabs the white fish. It struggles, but the hand forces it into a bag held by the left hand. Cut to Zhao standing up holding the back. The moon, visible behind him over his left shoulder, colors over a blood red while the fish struggles in the bag. Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(The show returns to a close up of the blood red moon. Cut to a pan shot of the back third of the city. The blood red light washes over it. The counterattack against the invaders falters as this happens. Shift to Pakku still riding his water tornado as the blood red light sweeps over him. As it does, his tornado collapses. Cut to another waterbender whose water whip disintegrates as the light changes. In another part of the city, a war rhinoceros is getting washed away, but the force driving the wave vanishes as the light turns red. The soldier on the war rhinoceros is once again able to advance on the waterbenders who flee in panic. Cut to a line of Fire Nation soldiers who fire volley after volley in unison.

Shift to Appa flying silhouetted against the red moon, then cut to Yue holding her head in pain in Appa's saddle.)

Princess Yue: Ugh...
Sokka: Are you okay?
Princess Yue: I feel faint.
Aang (his hand on his head as well): I feel it too. (Aang's looks up) The Moon Spirit is in trouble.
Princess Yue: I owe the Moon Spirit my life.
Sokka: What do you mean?
Princess Yue: When I was born I was very sick and very weak. Most babies cry when they're born...

(Yue's story takes over here and we see a little baby with black hair all bundled up.)

Princess Yue: ...but I was born as if I were asleep. My eyes closed.

(Cut to a wider shot of the baby resting on a table, surrounded by healers who try their art to try and save the child.)

Princess Yue: Our healers did everything they could. They told my mother and father I was going to die.

(A younger Arnook holds a beautiful, but devastated dark haired womanly tightly. Cut to Arnook looking up to the Moon, praying.)

Princess Yue: My father pleaded with the spirits to save me... (scene shifts to the sanctuary where Arnook, his wife and the baby stand by the pool) ... that night, beneath the full moon, he brought me to the oasis and placed me in the pond. My dark hair turned white, I opened my eyes and began to cry – and they knew I would live.

(The story ends, and the shot fades back to the present.)

Princess Yue: That's why my mother named me Yue, for the moon.

(Cut to a shot zooming backwards of the red moon. Underneath its light basks Zhao and his entourage by the pond in the oasis.)

Zhao: I am... (raising his fist to the heavens) a legend now! The Fire Nation will for generations tell stories about the great Zhao who darkened the moon! They will call me Zhao the Conqueror! Zhao the Moon Slayer! ZHAO THE INVINCIBLE!

(At this moment Momo jumps onto Zhao's head and starts pulling at his face and chittering.)

Zhao: Huh! Get it off!

(Momo flies off as the guards surround Zhao to help him. He lands on an outstretched arm – Aang's arm. Appa has landed and the kids square off against Zhao and his men.)

Zhao: Don't bother!

(A close up of Zhao zooms backward to show Zhao holding a knife or sword to the bag with the Moon Spirit in it. Aang drops his staff and raises his hands in surrender.)

Aang: Zhao! Don't!
Zhao: It's my destiny... to destroy the Moon... and the Water Tribe.
Aang: Destroying the moon won't just hurt the Water Tribe. It will hurt everyone – including you. Without the moon, everything would fall out of balance. You have no idea what kind of chaos that would unleash on the world.
Iroh (from o.c.): He is right, Zhao!

(Cut to a wide shot, that shows Iroh, Aang and Zhao in a triangle around the pond.)

Zhao (in a bored, lecturing tone): General Iroh, why am I not surprised to discover your treachery?

(Cut to a close up of Iroh who lowers his hood.)

Iroh: I'm no traitor, Zhao, the Fire Nation needs the moon too. We all depend on the balance.

(Cut to Zhao, still holding the weapon to the bag, then back to Iroh who points a finger at Zhao and thunders...)

Iroh: Whatever you do to that spirit I'll unleash on you ten-fold! (He assumes a firebending stance) LET IT GO, NOW!

(Iroh and Zhao lock eyes for a moment, then Zhao falters, lowering the bag. He kneels and releases the fish back into the water. The red light of the moon vanishes, replaced by its normal color. Cut to a close of Zhao's face which is quickly overtaken by a look of madness and desperation. With a cry of rage he stands and smites the water with a blast of fire. The frame rate slows as the fire blast passes Iroh, who recoils in horror. Aang and Momo's face is briefly illuminated by the fire. The Avatar looks up to witness the moon wink out of existence.

Iroh springs instantly to the attack. Crossing the foot bridge, Iroh fires blast after blast. Zhao blocks one blasts and backs away while Iroh expertly dispatches Zhao's four guards. Zhao looks on in horror as his men are wiped out by the aging General with such ease and precision. He flees.

Cut back to Iroh standing over the guards who struggle to get up, then back to the pond where the black fish swims frantically and white, a huge gash in its side, floats. Iroh gently lifts the white fish from the water, an expression of sadness on his face. The guards are now gone.)

Princess Yue (on the verge of tears, Sokka's hands on her shoulders): There's no hope now. It's over.

(Cut to Aang, who's sad expression turns to determination as his eyes and tattoos glow white. His Avatar Spirit speaks through his mouth.)

Aang (voice deep and other-worldly): No, it's not over.

(Cut to a wide shot of the five. Aang walks forward into the pond. Katara moves to follow, but she is stilled by a motion to halt from Iroh. Cut to a profile shot of the four, Katara, Iroh, Yue and Sokka looking at Aang. He stands in the middle of the pond, arms in prayer. He looks down at the black fish, whose eyes and white mark on his spine begin to glow white. Aang is then seen in profile, his feet in the pond which now glows bright white. Then he drops into the pond as if the bottom had fallen out of it and he disappears.

Cut to an overhead shot of the oasis. The water in the pool around the oasis itself begins to glow a deep blue veined with white. As the effect spreads, the shot cuts to a view of the citadel area behind the third wall. The glow spreads from behind the citadel to encompass the entire citadel area of the city. Cut back to the four who look with wonder at the awesome power coming to life before them. A huge, incandescent blue wave rushes under the footbridge as if some huge creature were moving underneath it. Cut to an overhead of the sanctuary. Appa stands on the oasis, but he is dwarfed by the creature that rises from the pool, the citadel and the city visible beyond it.

The blue, white veined creature is a huge fish like being. At its center is a blue white bubble in which we can see Aang, who spreads his arms wide. A moment later, the Ocean Spirit, for this is truly he in communion with the Avatar, duplicates the motion. Cut to a wide, long shot of the Ocean Spirit from the p.o.v. of Fire Nation soldiers who stand in front of the last wall. The Ocean Spirit towers over the citadel, it's arms still spread wide, it's blue spirit lighting the city like a beacon. The Spirit begins to move down into the city. Master Pakku and his waterbenders instantly bow to the floor in honor of their god. Across the canal, some Fire Nation soldiers raise their spears in defiance, but are swept away by a wall of water sent by the Ocean Spirit. Cut to Aang inside the body of the Ocean Spirit, flailing his arms about, directing the power of the Ocean Spirit against the violator's of the Moon Spirit and the Water Tribe City.

Fire Nation tanks fire blasts of fire at the Ocean Spirit, but they are absorbed with no effect. The soldiers and tanks are washed away as if they were toys. The Ocean Spirit passes by the Water Tribe citizens who make obeisance to their lord. Cut to the Fire Nation army in full retreat, trying desperately to escape the vengeance of a living Spirit. The Ocean Spirit reaches the main canal in front of the third wall and melts into it.

Cut to Zhao running over a foot bridge somewhere in the city. He exits onto a parapet an is almost hit by a blast of fire that hits the wall in front of him. As the smoke clears, Zhao looks up to see Zuko on the wall on the tier up above him.)

Zhao (incredulously): You're alive?
Zuko: You tried to have me killed!

(Zuko launches a few fire blasts at Zhao with a cry of anguish, but his target dodges, rolling along the parapet wall.)

Zhao (with much venom): Yes, I did. You're the Blue Spirit – and enemy of the Fire Nation!

(Cut to a wide shot of the two facing each other. Between them is the panorama of the city. The Ocean Spirit's essence travels down the main canal in the background.)

Zhao: You freed the Avatar!
Zuko: I had no choice!

(Zuko continues his attack firing volley after volley at Zhao, who breaks them with his hands held together in a wedge in front of him. As the blasts subside, Zhao drops his smoking cloak to the ground.)

Zhao: You should have chosen to accept your failure – your disgrace! Then, at least you could have lived!

(Zhao returns fire. They trade volleys as the fight rages back and forth in the darkness. At one point Zuko is able to exploit a moment when Zhao leaves his chest unguarded. Zuko blasts him and Zhao falls off the parapet wall onto the tier below.

Cut to Iroh placing the dead Moon Spirit fish back into the pond, then to a view of Katara and Iroh looking with concern into the pond.)

Katara: It's too late. It's dead.

(Cut to a profile shot of Yue, Iroh and Katara mourning the passing of the Moon Spirit. Suddenly, Iroh looks up at Yue in wonder.)

Iroh: You have been touched by the Moon Spirit. Some of its life is in you!
Princess Yue (looking up): Yes, you're right. It gave me life. Maybe I can give it back.

(She gets up and goes to the pond's edge.)

Sokka (reaching for her): No! You don't have to do that!
Princess Yue (holding his hand behind her, but looking down): It's my duty, Sokka.
Sokka (from o.c. as the camera shows a close up of their clasped hands): I won't let you! Your father told me to protect you!
Princess Yue (looking up): I have to do this.

(The frame rate slows as she releases his hand. She walks to Iroh, who holds the dead fish in his hands. She puts her palms over the Moon Spirit which begins to glow. She closes her eyes for the last time, exhales a final breath, and falls over into Sokka's arms.)

Sokka (in despair): NO!

(He places his hands on her cheek and looks away.)

Sokka (softly): She's gone. (He hugs her body tightly) She's gone.

(Cut to a shot of the outer wall where the Fire Navy ships try desperately to flee. The bowsprits raise quickly as the ships back out. Cut to an overhead shot of the water outside the main gate. The incandescent blue of the Ocean Spirit flows out past the city wall in front of the Fire Navy fleet. The Ocean Spirit reforms and, towering over the fleet, reaches out. He pushes two ships back out to see at amazing speed. Cut to a close up of Aang in the bubble making a slicing motion. Cut to a shot of the Ocean Spirit making the same slicing motion and making a razor cut through the bridge tower of Zhao's flagship. The cut section slides down to the foredeck and the ship's forward trebuchet is wrecked. Cut to a wide shot of the Ocean Spirit standing over the fleet. The Spirit raises its arms, forming a huge wave which upends many vessels and pushes the rest far out to sea.

The scene shifts back to Sokka cradling Yue's inert form. Her body glows briefly and disappears. The fish in Iroh's glows and he drops back in the water. It begins to swim in the pond. The pond glows white as they look on and a ghostly rises from it. It coalesces into Yue's form, but now she is dressed in white. Her hair floats around her. Cut to a close of her face, then a profile shot of her and the others. She addresses, Sokka, her voice now echoes and is other worldly.)

Princess Yue / Moon Spirit: Goodbye, Sokka. I will always be with you.

(She kisses him, their hands on each other's faces. She fades away, but in the sky, the moon shines bright.

Cut back to a pan left shot of the Ocean Spirit standing at the city walls. The Ocean Spirit looks up to see the moon alive once again. Instantly, Aang begins to wilt inside the creature, which dissipates into the ocean. The Spirit's essence flows back to the wall and deposits Aang atop it. There his glows leaves him as he puts his hand to the side of his head, spent with the effort.

Cut back to a long shot of Zuko and Zhao continuing to battle on a foot bridge over a canal. They trade blows, but a series of direct hits from Zuko lays the Admiral flat. As Zhao tries to get up, he sees the moon over Zuko's shoulder.)

Zhao (in horror): It can't be!

(Cut to a long shot of the bridge. The essence of the Ocean Spirit approaches fast and coalesces around the bridge. It grabs Zhao and begins to pull him off the bridge. Zhao struggles and Zuko reaches out for him.)

Zuko: Take my hand!

(Zhao tries to reach for it for a moment, but then draws back, an expression of hate on his face. The Ocean Spirit drags Zhao under the water and disappears. Fade to white.

The white screens resolves itself into a morning shot of the heavily damaged Water Tribe City from the citadel. Several figures survey the scene from below. Cut to Master Pakku standing in front of Katara.)

Master Pakku: I've decided to go to the South Pole. Some other benders and healers want to join me. (Turning to face Katara) It's time we helped rebuild our sister tribe.
Katara: What about Aang? (Cut to a shot behind Katara and Pakku as they look at Aang and Momo in the background) He still needs to learn waterbending.
Master Pakku (turning to her with satisfaction): Well, then he better get used to calling you "Master Katara."

(Cut to Sokka and Chief Arnook looking out over the city, backs to the camera.)

Chief Arnook (wistfully): The Spirits gave me a vision when Yue was born. I saw... a beautiful, brave young woman...become the Moon Spirit. (Closes his eyes) I knew this day would come.
Sokka: You must be proud.
Chief Arnook: So proud. And sad.

(They look up to moon, still visible in the morning sky before a fade to scene among the wreckage of the Fire Navy ships destroyed in the battle. Among the sunken shifts a small rafts sails. Cut to Iroh and Zuko on the raft.)

Iroh: I'm surprised, Prince Zuko, surprised that you are not at this moment trying to capture the Avatar.
Zuko: I'm tired.
Iroh (putting a hand on his nephew's shoulder): Then you should rest. A man needs his rest.

(Iroh stands as Zuko lays down. He looks up into the sky, a pained look on his face. He closes his eyes.

Fade to Aang looking out over the city. The camera view swivels to reveal Katara behind him. He turns and they look at each other for a moment. They come together and hug fiercely. A chittering is heard and Katara looks down to see Momo looking up at them.)

Katara: You too, Momo.
Aang (extending a forearm and laughing): Come here.

(Momo jumps up and Sokka, entering the frame from the left, puts an arm on Aang's shoulder. Cut to a view from behind the four as they look over the city. With a rumble, Appa rises from below. He floats patiently, awaiting his comrades so they can depart as the course of events pushes them all ever onward to their destinies.

Fade to the throne room of the Fire Lord himself. Cut to a view from behind the Fire Lord, seated on his throne. He is silhouetted by the flames that wreath his dais. Before him kneels a cruel looking young woman in a Fire Nation military uniform and a cloak.)

Fire Lord Ozai: Iroh is a traitor and your brother Zuko is a failure. (Cut to a close up of Azula's face as she looks up at her father with a smile) I have a task for you...

(Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(The episode begins with a shot looking up at gray clouds and the camera then pans down, looking between two spire-like towers of the Southern Air Temple at a circular platform with the peaks of mountains peaking above the clouds in the background. Cut to a shot of the Air Temple, looking up from below. Aang runs on screen from the right, pauses and looks both ways, then runs off screen to the left. Cut to a brown curtain. Aang pulls it open, looking at the screen with a surprised expression. Cut to behind Aang as he enters a room, the ceiling collapsed and a figure resembling himself sitting at the far end with his back to the screen. Aang stops. Cut to a close up of the figure at the end of the room, who turns around, revealing himself to be Aang as well. His eyes and the arrow symbol on his head are glowing blue. Cut back to Aang standing at the entrance to the room. Aang gasps. The wind blows violently around Aang. The camera pans over to the other Aang, who is surrounded in an orb of wind. Sokka and Katara are lying in the foreground, shielding themselves from the wind. Cut to a close-up of the glowing Aang, who slams his hands together. Cut back to the shot of Sokka and Katara on the ground. A bright light from Aang envelops them. Cut to the real Aang, who is hit by the powerful blast of wind and thrown backward into the Fire Temple.)

Aang: (as he falls) Aaahhh! (he lands on the floor of the Air Temple) Oof!

(Cut to behind Aang, who watches as the intricate Fire Temple door opens, revealing the glowing Aang hovering behind it. Cut to a close up of the glowing Aang, his clothing billowing in the wind. Cut to a close up of his face, an angry scowl on it. He opens his mouth and fire shoots out, and the camera pans around as he performs a strike with his hand, causing the ground beneath the real Aang to melt. He falls into the chasm. He lands on the deck of a Fire Nation ship. Cut to behind Aang, who looks up and sees the Water Spirit from "The Siege of the North, Part 2" approaching the ship. Cut to in front of Aang, the camera zooming in on his surprised face. Cut to the glowing Aang, who is surrounded by blue light. He raises an arm, ready to strike. Cut to behind the real Aang, who watches as the water spirit mimics the action. The spirit strikes the ship. Cut to the glowing Aang, who once again does the striking motion that he used to break the ground beneath Aang before.

Aang gasps awake and breathes hard. He is in a fur hammock beneath the deck of a ship. Cut to a scene of the entire room. Four such hammocks, two on each side, are in the room. Aang sits on the upper left, with Katara lying asleep in the lower right. Cut to a scene of Aang breathing hard. He jumps down from his hammock. Cut to a scene of him climbing a ladder with Katara in the foreground. She rises as he exits the screen.)

Katara: Aang?

(Cut to a close up of Katara's face. Cut to full view of the ship. Cut again to above deck. Katara approaches Aang, who is looking out over the ocean.)

Katara: Do you wanna talk about it?
Aang: Nah. Just a nightmare.

(Cut to a close-up of Aang's face from above. He looks up at the camera as he talks.)

Aang: (unsettled) I was in the Avatar state, but I was outside my body watching myself. It was scary. I was scary.

(Katara puts her hand on Aang's shoulder and looks out over the ocean.

Cut to the same ship next morning. Master Pakku is on the deck of the ship with several other men from the Northern Water Tribe. He reaches into a bag and pulls out a triangle-shaped amulet.)

Master Pakku: (in a serious and ceremonial manner) Katara, I want you to have this. (Cut to a close-up of the amulet, showing that it is a triangle with a wave-shaped pattern of blue color with a crescent moon on the top.) This amulet contains water from the Spirit Oasis. (Cut to behind Master Pakku as he hands the amulet to Katara, who is standing in front of Appa and next to Aang.) The water has unique properties. Don't lose it. (His face softens.)
Katara: (respectfully) Thank you, Master Pakku.

(She embraces him and then walks off screen. Aang steps forward and Master Pakku produces an intricately-decorated brown box.)

Master Pakku: Aang, these scrolls will help you master waterbending, but remember they're no substitute for a real master.

(Aang looks up at Katara, who is on top of Appa, and then exits to the left as Sokka steps forward.)

Master Pakku: Sokka. (Sokka looks at him proudly and expectantly.) Take care, son.

(Pakku pats Sokka's arm, giving him nothing. Sokka's expression becomes very dejected and embarrassed.)

Master Pakku: Fly straight to the Earth Kingdom base to the east of here. General Fong will provide you with an escort to Omashu. There you'll be safe to begin your earthbending training with King Bumi.
Aang: Appa, yip yip!

(Aang pulls the reigns and Appa lifts off. Cut to behind Master Pakku as he waves goodbye.)

Katara: (calls back as they fly off) Say hi to Gran Gran for me! (Cut to a scene looking down at the ship as Appa flies toward the screen.)

(Cut to a bathhouse stretching over a wide river. Cut to a scene of blossoming cherry trees. The camera pans down, revealing Iroh lying on his back.)

Iroh: (contentedly, as he receives a massage from two attendants. Halfway through the speech the scene changes to show Zuko sitting to the side, his face concealed by a hat.) Aaahhh... this is what I've been missing. Who knew floating on a piece of driftwood for three weeks with no food or water and sea vultures waiting to pluck out your liver could make one so tense?

(He casts a glance at Zuko and walks over to sit beside him on the floor.)

Iroh: I see. It's the anniversary, isn't it?

(Cut to a close-up of Zuko's face, still hidden under the wide-brimmed hat.)

Zuko: (dejectedly) Three years ago today I was banished. I lost it all. (He looks up suddenly.) I want it back. I want the Avatar, I want my honor, I want my throne. I want my father not to think I'm worthless.
Iroh: (with exaggerated optimism) I'm sure he doesn't! Why would he banish you if he didn't care?

(Zuko gets up and walks away. Cut to Iroh's surprised face with the attendants in the background.)

Iroh: (negatively to himself) Erg... that came out wrong, didn't it?

(Cut to Azula's warship. Two lines of red armor-clad Fire Nation soldiers are standing on the deck, and fall to their knees as the elaborate cabin opens at the edge of the ship. Cut to a scene of four servants carrying a curtained platform between the lines of soldiers. They stop at the top of the stairs and pull apart the curtains, revealing Azula. Cut to a scene of her feet stepping out. Cut to behind her as she examines her soldiers. She raises a hand, then looks at the two rows. They rise and she begins to walk between them.)

Azula: (to her men) My brother and my uncle have disgraced the Fire Lord and brought shame on all of us. You may have mixed feelings about attacking members of the royal family; I understand. But I assure you, if you hesitate, I will not hesitate to bring you down. Dismissed.

(The troops quickly run off to the left, and a lone soldier approaches

Captain: (respectfully) Princess, I'm afraid the tides will not allow us to bring the ship in to port before nightfall.

(Cut to in front of Azula with the captain behind her. She turns and walks to the left as she speaks.)

Azula: I'm sorry, Captain, but I do not know much about the tides. Can you explain something to me?

(Cut to a profile of the captain.)

Captain: Of course, Your Highness.

(Cut to in front of Azula.)

Azula: Do the tides command this ship?
Captain: Uh... I'm afraid I do not understand.
Azula: (condescendingly) You said the tides would not allow us to bring the ship in. Do the tides command this ship?

(Cut back to the profile of the captain, who looks over at Azula nervously.)

Captain: No, Princess.

(Cut to behind Azula looking out over the ocean.)

Azula: And if I were to have you thrown overboard, would the tides think twice about smashing you against the rocky shore?

(Cut to profile of the captain, who gulps and closes his eyes.)

Captain: (nervously) No, Princess.

(Cut once more to behind Azula. She pushes a strand of hair from her face, then turns around while speaking.)

Azula: Well, then, maybe you should worry less about the tides who've already made up their mind about killing you and worry more about me, who's still mulling it over.
Captain: (quickly) I'll pull us in. (The captain bows respectfully and runs off toward the cabin. Azula glares at him as he leaves.)

(Cut to Appa flying. Sokka leans on the edge looking bored, then suddenly stands up, looking excited. Cut to behind Appa overlooking the mountainous landscape. A circular, walled tower comes into view.)

Sokka: (excitedly) There it is!

(Cut to a closer view of the walled tower from above. Appa flied down toward it. Cut to a profile of the wall. Appa lands inside. Cut to a bearded man in a green cap and brown and green armor who steps forward.)

General Fong: (graciously) Welcome, Avatar Aang!

(Cut to a scene of Sokka stretching, Katara bringing their supplies down from Appa, and Aang rubbing his behind. They stop and look up at the General Fong. Cut back to Fong, who bows along with numerous soldiers behind him, then spreads his arms in greeting.)

General Fong: I am General Fong. And welcome to all of you, great heroes! (Cut to the heroes as he mentions their names.) Appa, Momo, brave Sokka, the mighty Katara.
Katara: (pleased) "Mighty Katara"? I like that.

(Fireworks explode behind them, and the three turn to look at them. A group of four Earthbenders step forward, lifting small, green orbs from the ground and launching them into the air with their fists. Cut to a wide view of the tower with fireworks in the background. Cut back to Aang, Katara, and Sokka, who look amazed.)

Sokka: Not bad, not bad.

(Cut to inside of the base. The room is large, with green-lit columns on each side of a central walkway. A desk is seen at the far end, with a large banner showing a green circle and a brown square inside of it hanging from the ceiling. Aang, Sokka, and Katara sit in the center of the room on a mat, with Fong at the desk. The camera zooms in closer to them.)

General Fong: Avatar Aang, we were all amazed at the stories of how you single-handedly wiped out an entire Fire Navy fleet at the North Pole. (Close up of Fong, stroking his beard thoughtfully) I can't imagine what it feels like to wield such devastating power. (He stops stroking.) It's an awesome responsibility.

(Cut to the three friends on the mat.)

Aang: (humbly) I try not to think about it too much.

(Cut to a close-up of Fong's face. He smiles happily.)

General Fong: Avatar... you're ready to face the Fire Lord now.

(Cut to a close up of Aang's face. He seems content at first, but his expression quickly changes to one of surprised disbelief.)

Aang: (alarmed) What?! No I'm not!

(Cut to the three friends, with Katara closest to the camera.)

Katara: Aang still needs to master all four elements.

(Cut to a wide shot of Fong at his desk.)

General Fong: Why? (becomes worked up as he speaks and rises from his desk) With the kind of power he possesses—power enough to destroy hundreds of battleships in a matter of minutes—he could defeat the Fire Lord now!

(Cut back to the three, with Sokka raising his hand somewhat timidly.)

Sokka: But, sir, the thing is Aang can only do those things when he's in the Avatar state.
Aang: See, it's this special state where—

(Cut to a side view of the room, with Fong at the left and the others at the right.)

General Fong: (interrupts heatedly) I'm well aware. (he continues more gently) Your eyes and tattoos glow and you're able to summon unbelievable power. (He walks around his desk, then the scene cuts to a map of the Avatar world, with Fong approaching it.) Without you we'd be slaughtered before we even reach their shores. (Cut to in front of Fong, with the others in the background.) But with you leading the way as the ultimate weapon, we could cut a swath right through to the heart of the Fire Nation. (He points at the map, drawing a line with his finger from the Earth Kingdom to the Fire Nation.)

(Cut to Aang, who looks concerned.)

Aang: (with uncertainty) Right... but I'm don't know how to get in or out of the Avatar state, much less what to do once I'm there.

(Cut back to in front of Fong. He turns around and faces the three.)

General Fong: So it's decided then. I'll help you figure out how to get into the Avatar state, and then you'll face your destiny.

(The three stand up. Sokka and Aang look surprised while Katara seems angry.)

Katara: (irritated) No, nothing's decided. We already have a plan. Aang's pursuing his destiny his way.

(Cut to behind the three. Fong is once more at his desk.)

General Fong: Well, while you take your time learning the elements, the war goes on. May I show you something?

(Fong and Aang walk over to a circular window overlooking two orange-roofed buildings. A large crowd is standing outside one.)

General Fong: That's the infirmary, and those soldiers are the lucky ones. (Cut to a scene of injured soldiers walking toward the infirmary.) They came back. (Cut to looking in at Aang and Fong from outside the window. Aang looks down sadly.) Every day the Fire Nation takes lives. People are dying, Aang! You could end it, now! Think about it.

(Cut to Azula's battle ship and her lightning bending practice. The sun is setting in the background. Azula stands on the deck and brings her arms down in front of her. Cut to two old women watching from the top of the stairs. Azula swings an arm around, electricity sparking from her left hand. She brings it around in a circle, then begins to mimic the motion with her right hand, electricity shooting from her index and middle fingers. She brings her fingers together, and then lunges forward, launching a lightning bolt from her left hand. The lightning arcs over the edge of the ship. Cut to in front of Azula, her fingers smoking and a single strand of hair dangling in front of her face. Cut to the old women on the stairs.)

Elder 1: Almost perfect.
Elder 2: One hair out of place.

(Cut to the same scene of Azula. The camera zooms in quickly as Azula glares angrily at the one strand of hair. She wipes it from her eyes.)

Azula: 'Almost' isn't good enough!

(She begins the training again and shoots lightning at the camera. Cut to Iroh being awakened, presumably by Azula's lightning. He sits up in bed and stares out the doorway.

Cut again to nightfall in the Earth Kingdom base. Cut to General Fong, looking down at a map on his desk.)

Aang: (o.c.) General Fong?

(Fong looks up, smiling. The scene cuts to a profile, with Fong at the left and Aang at the right.)

General Fong: (warmly) Come in, Aang. Have you thought about our discussion?

(The camera zooms in on Aang's face.)

Aang: (looks down in uncertainty) I'm in. (looks up with determination) I'll fight the Fire Lord.

(Cut to commercial.)



Act II

(Scene opens on the base again. Cut to the trio's room. Aang enters the dimly-lit room from a door at the right. Cut to Aang walking across the room as Katara rises from her bed in the background, Momo sitting on her lap. Aang sits down on his bed.)

Aang: (quietly) I told the general I'd help him... by going into the Avatar state.
Katara: Aang, no. This is not the right way.

(Cut to Sokka, who is lounging with his arms behind his head.)

Sokka: Why not? Remember when he took out the Fire Navy? He was incredible.

(Cut back to Aang and Katara.)

Katara: There's a right way to do this. Practice, study, and discipline.

(Cut to a close-up of Sokka's face.)

Sokka: Or just glow it up and stop that Fire Lord.

(Cut to looking over Sokka at the other two. Katara rises from her bed and approaches Aang and Sokka.)

Katara: (angrily) If you two meatheads want to throw away everything we've worked for, fine. Go ahead and glow it up! (She exits to the right. Aang rises and starts after her.)
Aang: (pleading) Katara, I'm just being realistic. I don't have time to do this the right way. (He looks sad and almost ashamed.)

(Cut to the base during the day. The camera pans to a cliff side away from the base with a small open-air building on top. Cut to a table with a steaming teapot while the teacher talks, dropping something into the teapot with chopsticks. )

Teacher: This rare chi-enhancing tea is a natural stimulant. In an ordinary warrior it improves strength and energy ten-fold. In you, it may induce the Avatar state.

(The teacher pours the team into a cup in front of Aang, who is sitting at the small table across from him and next to Fong. Sokka and Katara sit side-by-side a few feet behind Aang.)

Aang: Ten-fold energy, huh? (slurps; twitch, twitch, twitch)

(Aang begins to race around the small structure on his air ball while the others remain motionless.)

Aang: (speaking in a fast, high-pitched, hyper voice while zipping everywhere on his air-scooter) Is it working, is it working? I can't tell! Somebody tell me if I'm in the Avatar state 'cause I don't have a good view of myself! Am I talking too loud?
Sokka: (Looking bored.) I guess he could talk the Fire Lord to death.
Aang: (collides with a column, his air ball disappear and his shawl falling over his head.) Ooof!

(Cut to outside at the entrance gate to the base. Aang and Katara sit on the ground while Fong stands behind them, stroking his beard. Sokka is in the foreground, his back to the camera and his arms folded behind his back.)

Sokka: Maybe I can shock you into the Avatar state.
Aang: (cheerfully) I love surprises.

(Cut to Aang's point of view. Katara covers his eyes with her hands. When she removes them, Momo's head has replaced Sokka's.)

Momo: Raahh!

(Cut to Aang, who lurches backward.)

Aang: Aaahhh! (looks at his hands and holds them up) Still not glowing.

(Sokka loses his balance. He yells while Momo chatters and they both topple over. Cut to General Fong, who just shakes his head.

Cut to the inside of a temple. Aang stands in the center wearing a ridiculous hat with leaves coming out of the top and a blue cape. Fong, Sokka, and Katara stand at the right side of the screen. A priest is in the distance near a stairway.)

Priest: (pretentiously) You are wearing a ceremonial piece of clothing from each of the bending nations. Now I will join the four elements into one! (As he mentions each element, he throws a pan of water, dirt, a torch, and blows air into a mixture.) Water, earth, fire, air! Four elements together as one! (throws mixture at Aang)

(The mixture splatters over Aang, covering him in mud.)

Aang: This is just mud!

(Cut to the priest, who gives Aang an odd look.)

Priest: So... do you feel anything?

(Cut back to Aang, whose nose begins to twitch. He lifts up a finger. Cut to Fong, Sokka, and Katara, who look hopeful. Cut back to Aang as he sneezes.)

Aang: Aaaaachoooo!

(Cut back to the others, who get sprayed by mud from Aang's sneeze. Fong wipes his face.)

General Fong: (determined) We have to find a way.

(Cut to the bathhouse. Iroh empties a bag of seashells on a table. He lifts a few, inspecting them.)

Iroh: Look at these magnificent shells! I'll enjoy these keepsakes for years to come.
Zuko: We don't need anymore useless things. You forget we have to carry everything ourselves now.
Azula: (o.c.) Hello, brother. Uncle.

(The camera pans out, revealing Azula at a table in the foreground, her hand on a seashell. Cut to Zuko and Iroh, who look surprised, and then angry. Zuko steps forward.)

Zuko: (accusingly) What are you doing here?

(Cut back to Azula. The camera looks up at her from below. She seems utterly unaffected by their glares. She toys with the seashell in her hand.)

Azula: (arrogantly) In my country, we exchange a pleasant 'hello' before asking questions. (She gets up and walks over to face Zuko.) Have you become uncivilized so soon, Zuzu?
Zuko: (furiously) Don't call me that!
Iroh: To what do we owe this honor?

(Cut to a close-up of Azula, still holding the seashell.)

Azula: Hmm... must be a family trait. Both of you so quick to get to the point. (She shatters one of Iroh's shells with her sharp nails on this last word. Iroh's face darkens.) I've come with a message from home. Father's changed his mind. Family is suddenly very important to him. He's heard rumors of plans to overthrow him—treacherous plots. Family are the only ones you can really trust. (Her voice and face soften.) Father regrets your banishment. He wants you home.

(Cut to Zuko, who looks out the window. The camera pans toward Azula.)

Azula: (o.c.) Did you hear me? You should be happy. Excited. Grateful. (Camera returns to show her pleasant expression.) I just gave you great news.
Iroh: I'm sure your brother just needs a moment to—
Azula: (interrupting him angrily) Don't interrupt, Uncle! (addresses Zuko. The camera pans to show his scarred face in the foreground, and Azula walks up beside him.) I still haven't heard my thank you. I am not a messenger. I didn't have to come all this way.
Zuko: (with shocked and quiet disbelief) Father regrets? He... wants me back?
Azula: I can see you need time to take this in. I'll come to call on you tomorrow. Good evening. (Azula walks off screen to the right.)

(Cut to the base in the evening. Aang and Katara are standing on the wall.)

Katara: (o.c.) Can we talk about something?
Aang: (o.c.) Sure.
Katara: Do you remember when we were at the air temple and you found Monk Gyatso's skeleton? It must have been so horrible and traumatic for you. I saw you get so upset that you weren't even you anymore. I'm not saying the Avatar state doesn't have incredible—and helpful power. But you have to understand, for the people who love you, watching you be in that much rage and pain is really scary.
Aang: I'm really glad you told me that. But I still need to do this.
Katara: I don't understand.
Aang: No, you don't. Every day more and more people die. I'm already a hundred years late. Defeating the Fire Lord is the only way to stop this war. I have to try it.
Katara: (quietly) I can't watch you do this to yourself. I'm not coming tomorrow. (She begins to walk off toward the screen, but pauses.) Goodnight. (She exits off screen.)
Aang: (sadly) Goodnight.

(Cut to nightfall at the bathhouse.)

Zuko: (o.c., happily) We're going home. After three long years. It's unbelievable. (Zuko walks behind a thoughtful Iroh, carrying some folded clothing. He walks off to the right of the screen.)
Iroh: (skeptically) It is unbelievable. I have never known my brother to regret anything.

(Cut to a close-up of Zuko. At first he sounds surprised, and then forceful.)

Zuko: Did you listen to Azula? Father's realized how important family is to him. He cares about me.
Iroh: I care about you. And if Ozai wants you back... well, I think it may not be for the reasons you imagine.
Zuko: (defensively, turning his back to Iroh) You don't know how my father feels about me. (He stiffens) You don't know anything.

(Cut to the scarred portion of Zuko's face in the foreground with Iroh talking over his shoulder.)

Iroh: (gently) Zuko, I only meant that in our family things are not always what they seem.

(Zuko whirls around angrily and faces Iroh, leaning in as he accuses him.)

Zuko: (nastily) I think you are exactly what you seem: a lazy, mistrustful, shallow old man who has always been jealous of his brother.

(Zuko turns and walks away. Iroh looks on sadly, then closes his eyes.)

(Cut to Aang's dream. A river with icy cliffs on both banks is shown. Aang, glowing in the Avatar State, explodes from the river in a tall column of swirling water. He sours through the sky, then turns down toward a Fire Nation ship with the real Aang standing on the deck. The glowing Aang lands on the deck and swings his vortex of water like a whip at Aang.)

Aang: (as the water vortex knocks him overboard) Aaahhh!

(The glowing Aang stands in the foreground, with Zuko looking on behind him. The glowing Aang turns around, and Zuko briefly assumes a defensive stance before turning and running. Aang, no longer glowing, launches a water attack at him.

Aang starts awake in bed and gasps. He turns over toward Sokka.)

Aang: (softly) Sokka. Sokka, wake up.
Sokka: (groggily) Wha...?

(Aang sits up, looking weary.)

Aang: I don't think we should be trying to bring on the Avatar state.

(Sokka looks over. His hair is down for once.)

Sokka: You sure?
Aang: Yes.

(Sokka shrugs.)

Sokka: (accepting) Okay.
Aang: (apprehensive) Do you think the general will be mad?
Sokka: What can he say? You're the Avatar. Who knows better than you?

(Sokka rolls over. Aang looks away, then lies back down, folding his arms behind his head.)

(Cut to the stairway outside of the bathhouse. Zuko is descending quickly, a bag over his shoulder. He pauses for a moment and looks down at the Fire Nation ship in the bay below, then turns to continue on.)

Iroh: (calling out urgently) Wait! (Cut to a full view of the staircase, with Iroh descending and waving behind Zuko.) Don't leave without me!
Zuko: (happily surprised) Uncle! You've changed your mind!
Iroh: Family sticks together, right?

(Cut to a close-up of Zuko's face as Iroh puts a hand on his shoulder. He smiles happily. There is a sudden flashback to Iroh's hand on the back of a young Zuko. Return to the present, and Zuko and Iroh both turn and look down at the ship below.)

Zuko: We're finally going home.

(Zuko continues on, but Iroh takes a second glance at the ship. The camera zooms in on it. Cut back to Iroh, who looks skeptical.)

(Cut back to the Earth Kingdom base. Aang stands inside the base in front of Fong's desk.)

Aang: The thing is, I don't think we'll ever be able to trigger it on purpose. So, I guess that's it.

(Cut to Fong, who sounds disappointed when speaking.)

General Fong: Sure I can't change your mind?

(Cut to Aang, who looks down sadly.)

Aang: I'm sure. I can only reach the Avatar state when I'm in genuine danger.

(Cut to Fong, who looks away.)

General Fong: I see. I was afraid you'd say that.

(Cut to Fong's foot as he steps back, causing a small shock wave. He pushes forward, sending his desk flying at Aang. Cut to Aang, who looks surprised as the desk rams into him.)

Aang: (gets hit with the desk) Ugh!

(The desk rockets toward a window. Cut to Sokka, who tries to go after him, but is restrained by two guards.)

Sokka: Aang!

(Cut to outside the tower. The desk crashes through the wall. Both Aang and the desk fall toward the ground.)

Aang: (about to hit the ground) Aaahhh!

(Using his Airbender abilities, Aang slows his fall with a gust of air. He tumbles forward, and the desk crashes and breaks apart behind him. Fong runs to the destroyed wall and points angrily at Aang.)

General Fong: Men! Attack the Avatar!

(Aang's eyes widen in surprise as four groups of three guards close in around him.)

(Cut to commercial)



Act III

(Aang looks up in surprise. Cut to Fong, who leaps down from the Tower and lands in front of Aang, sending a wave of moving earth toward Aang. He leaps over the wave.)

Aang: What are you doing?

(Cut to Fong, looking sinister.)

General Fong: I believe we are about to get results.

(The six Earthbenders on either side of Aang lift circular discs of earth with square holes in the middle around themselves, then hurl them at Aang. Cut to behind Aang. The first two roll toward him from both sides, and he steps backward, avoiding them. He leaps into the air and spreads his body horizontally as two discs fly above and below him. He sours toward the screen, then lands and peers over his shoulder. Other Earthbenders stand ready with more discs behind him.)

Aang: I am not your enemy! I won't fight you!

(Four discs are launched at Aang, and he leaps over them as they collide right where he was standing. He lands on one of the upright discs, and another flies from the left and knocks it over. As he falls, two of the other upright discs close in around him. Cut to a profile, with Aang scrunched in the square holes in the discs as they begin to roll. The discs roll into an Earthbender, who shatters them. Aang goes flying and skids along the ground. He stands up, surveying the troops around him.)

(Cut to Sokka, who is still being held by two guards in the tower. He lifts up his legs and slams his feet down on those of the guards. They look pained, and Sokka escapes as they fall down. He runs to the broken wall that Aang fell out of and looks down.)

(Cut back to Aang. Four Earthbenders surround him, throwing their stone discs. Two collide horizontally and Aang leaps over them. The other two try to smash him between them, and he leaps through the hole in the middle of the one on the right. He zooms off on his ball of air while three Earthbenders try to raise walls of earth to stop him. He zig-zags between them. He shoots past two spear-wielding guards on ostrich-like creatures. They begin to chase after him. He starts up the wall of the base with the creatures in pursuit. He begins to tire out toward the top, his ball of wind disappearing and he just runs. The creatures close, and Aang barely misses their spears and begins to fall.)

(Aang hits the ground and tumbles forward, the creatures jumping down behind him. He stumbles forward onto one of the disc-shaped portions of the floor. Fong lifts it up with his Earthbending skills, trapping Aang in the center hold and bringing him to him.)

General Fong: You can't run forever!
Aang: You can't fight forever!

(Fong leaps forward, smashing the ring with his foot. Aang leaps away.)

(Cut to Azula's ship. A group of Fire Nation soldiers form two ranks along the path leading to the ship. Zuko and Iroh walk toward them. Cut to Azula, standing at the top of the stairs leading onto her ship, a soldier on each side. Cut back to Zuko and Iroh as they walk between the soldiers. Zuko looks content, while Iroh eyes them suspiciously. Cut to Azula, who raises her arms in greeting and bows to them.)

Azula: Brother! Uncle! (Cut back to Zuko and Iroh, both bowing. Iroh opens one eye slightly, watching the soldiers beside him.) Welcome. I'm so glad you decided to come.

(The two files of soldiers close in behind Zuko and Iroh.)

Captain: Are we ready to depart, Your Highness?
Azula: (pleasantly) Set our course for home, Captain.
Zuko: (wistfully) Home...

(Zuko and Iroh begin to climb the stairs onto the ship, the captain leading the way.)

Captain: (to the other men) You heard the princess! Raise the anchors! We're taking the prisoners ho— (stops abruptly, realizing his mistake)

(Zuko and Iroh stop, looking surprised. Cut to Azula, who looks enraged. Cut back to the captain, his eyes wide.)

Captain: (mortified) Your Highness... I...

(Cut to Zuko, his eyes widening. Cut to Iroh, who looks to his left, then spins around, backhanding a guard off of the ship and kicking another down the incline. Another guard approaches from his left. He elbows him off the incline. He punches another that approaches from his right and grabs another, spinning him around and tossing him.)

(Cut to Zuko. He grabs one guard, throwing him off the incline and into the water. He stalks up the incline, furious.)

Zuko: You lied to me!

(Cut to Azula, who appears confident.)

Azula: (smugly) Like I've never done that before.

(She turns and walks away, and two guards launch fire at the camera. Zuko brushes the fire aside and charges forward, screaming.)

(Cut to the Earth Kingdom Base training yard o' doom. Aang ruins away from the camera as four discs fall from the sky. He turns and begins to run to the left, with a disc rolling after him.)

Aang: Aaahhh!

(Cut to Katara and Momo in the upstairs room. Katara sits on her bed, her knees tucked up. The room shakes, and she and Momo look toward the camera. She glances down at Momo.)

Katara: I wonder what crazy thing they're trying now. (Cut to Momo, who makes a purring noise and closes his eyes.) Maybe we should just make sure Aang's okay.

(She gets up and leaves the room. Cut to outside the tower, where both Katara and Sokka are running down the stairs. They meet at the bottom.)

Katara: (to Sokka) What's going on?
Sokka: The general's gone crazy. He's trying to force Aang into the Avatar state!

(Sokka and Katara watch as Aang runs between two groups of soldiers. Sokka pulls out his boomerang and tosses it. Cut to behind one Earthbender. Right as he's about to throw his disc at Aang, the Boomerange hits his helmet and knocks him out cold. His disc falls over.)

(Cut to Aang, who is running from one of the birdlike creatures. Cut to his pursuer. Something shoots by, and he suddenly realizes that his spear his been cut in half. Cut to Katara, who has sliced the spear with a stream of water.)

(Cut to Sokka, who is approaching one of the birdlike creatures, its rider unconscious on the ground. He has his arms lifted in the air as he slowly approaches.)

Sokka: (nervous coaxing) Good bird/horse thingy.

(He grabs the reins and leaps on the back of the creature. It takes off running. Katara remains stationary, and the camera zooms back, showing Fong in the foreground, lining up a group of discs around Katara. Cut to in front of him. Aang climbs the stairway of the tower behind him. He looks over his shoulder.)

General Fong: Maybe you can avoid me, but she can't.

(The Earthbenders use their discs to create a v-shaped wall, making sure that the only means of escape is by General Fong. Katara throws her stream of water at Fong, but he raises a patch of dirt, creating a patch of mud. He takes up a fighting stance. Cut back to Katara, who spins around and begins to sink into the ground. She is up to her knees in dirt. She struggles to escape but doesn't budge.)

Katara: Aaahhh! (grunts, straining) I can't move!

(Cut to Aang, who looks enraged.)

Aang: Don't hurt her!

(He leaps down from the staircase and shoots a stream of air at Fong. Cut to Fong, who looks surprised, but quickly raises a wall of earth to protect himself. He lowers the wall, the turns back to Katara, who sinks deeper into the ground.)

Katara: (sinking deeper) Aaahhh!

(Cut to Sokka, who rides out from behind one of the discs on his birdlike creature. He charges toward Fong.)

Sokka: Katara! No! (Fong sinks the bird creature's legs into the dirt and Sokka gets tossed from his ostrich, landing in the hole of one of the discs.) Waaaahhh! Oof!

(Aang runs to to Fong, grabbing his arm.)

Aang: Stop this! You have to let her go.

(Fong looks down at Aang angrily.)

General Fong: (maliciously) You could save her if you were in the Avatar state.

(Cut to Aang's face. He appears frustrated and desperate. Tears begin to form in his eyes.)

Aang: (desperately) I'm trying... I'm trying!

(Cut to Katara, who continues to sink further into the ground. She is now up to her armpits.)

Katara: Aang, I'm sinking!

(Cut back to Fong, whose tone sounds mocking.)

General Fong: I don't see glowing.

(Fong pushes his fist toward the ground, and Katara sinks further, only her head remaining above ground.)

Katara: (terrified) Aaahhh! Please!

(Aang drops to the ground at Fongs feet, still clutching his hand.)

Aang: (hysterical) You don't need to do this!
General Fong: Apparently I do.

(Fong clenches his fist and Katara disappears totally into the ground. Aang dives for her, just barely missing her hands. Cut to the back of his head. The arrow mark on his head begins to glow, and he turns around, revealing that the Avatar State has been activated. He glares angrily at Fong as he rises.)

(Cut to Fong, who lifts his fist into the air in victory.)

General Fong: (exulting) It worked. It worked!

(A strong blast of wind hits Fong, and he shields himself with his arms. Cut to Aang, who is standing in front of him, wind billowing around him. Cut back to Fong, who smiles, but the grin quickly fades as he becomes terrified. Cut back to Aang, who launches a karate chop-like attack at the screen. Cut to Fong, who goes flying backward. He lands at the base of the tower. Cut back to Aang, who lifts himself up in a vortex of dirt. The camera pans up into the sky, and the scene changes to Zuko leaping onto Azula's ship.)

(Cut to Azula's ship. Zuko leaps on board, knocking two guards on either side out of the way with flames shooting from his arm and leg. Cut to a profile of the deck of the ship. Zuko takes up a fighting stance at the left while Azula remains motionless, her back to her brother. Cut to in front of Azula. She glances to her left and grins evilly. Cut to behind Zuko, who brings his arms down, fire daggers appearing in his fists. )

(Cut to Iroh, who is fighting soldiers on the path leading to the ship. A soldier launches a kick at him, but a blast of fire from Iroh sends him flying. Two other soldiers approach from each side, and Iroh sends two blasts of fire at them, knocking them from the path. Another guard launches a fireball at Iroh's face, but he avoids it, grabbing the soldier's arm and putting a hand on his neck. Holding the guard, he turns toward the ship.)

Iroh: Zuko! Let's go!

(He tosses the guard off the side of the path. Another approaches, throwing fire at the screen, but Iroh steps to the side and pushes him away with a palm to the face.)

(Cut to the deck of the ship and Zuko. He swings his fire daggers at the camera ferociously. He swings his daggers at Azula repeatedly, but she simply avoid them. She grabs his arm and spins him around. Zuko is breathing hard.)

Azula: You know Father blames Uncle for the loss at the North Pole. And he considers you a miserable failure for not finding the Avatar. (o.c.) Why would he want you back home, except to lock you up where you can no longer embarrass him?

(Zuko brings out his fire daggers again and leaps at Azula, throwing a flaming kick at her head. She leaps back, nimbly dodging his blows. She swipes at his face with her fingernails. Zuko staggers back, revealing three cuts on his forehead. He charges forward and screams, swiping his daggers at Azula. She blocks his blows effortlessly and the fight continues up the stairs toward the cabin of the ship. She kicks Zuko, knocking him down the stairs a bit. He recovers quickly and charges back toward Azula. She blocks his fist and grabs his arm, bringing it down harmlessly. She glares at him, and Zuko's eyes widen. She tosses a blue flame at his head, sending him tumbling down the incline. He lands with a thud and pulls himself up, looking back at the incline. Cut to Zuko's point of view. His vision is blurry and shaky as he tries to locate Azula. She is standing at the top of the incline and begins to swing her arms in arcs around, lightning arcing around her. It is the same maneuver she was practicing earlier. She aims her fingers at Zuko and a lightning bolt shoots toward him.)

(Cut to Iroh, who suddenly appears and grabs Azula's fingers in his hand. He channels the electricity through his body and shoots it from his other hand, letting it explode harmlessly into the cliffside. He turns back to Azula and kicks her, sending her flying overboard. She splashes into the water. Cut to Iroh and Zuko, who are running down the path from the ship.)

(Cut back to the Earth Kingdom base. Aang is still swirling in his vortex of dust with General Fong in the foreground. Cut to a close up of Fong, who cups his hands and shouts at Aang.)

General Fong: Avatar Aang, can you hear me?! Your friend is safe! (He raises his arms and Katara emerges from the ground, gasping.) It was just a trick to trigger the Avatar state, AND IT WORKED!

(Aang whirls around, his face angry. The vortex suddenly collapses and Aang slams into the ground, a cloud of dust shooting forward. Fong is sent flying. Large chunks of earth rise from the ground, sending Earth Kingdom soldiers into the air. The wave of destruction crashes into the buildings around the base, cracking them apart.)

(Cut to Aang, who is hovering. His body suddenly glows blue, a surprised expression on his face. This blue spirit form leaves his glowing body and rises into the sky. Cut to a scene overlooking the wrecked base. Roku and Aang fly by quickly on Roku's dragon. Cut to the two on the dragon, Roku looking back at Aang.)

Roku: It's time you learned.

(The dragon flies off into golden clouds. Cut to a view of the clouds. There are figures standing on them. The dragon flies by. Cut to a close-up of Roku and Aang.)

Roku: The Avatar state is a defense mechanism, designed to empower you with the skills and knowledge of all the past Avatars.

(Cut to a female Avatar in a green robe and mask, holding fans. Her eyes glow briefly and she takes up a fighting stance. The camera zooms out, revealing two huge statues of mole-like creatures. They lift into the air and fly toward the screen.)

Roku: The glow is the combination of all your past lives, focusing their energy through your body.

(Cut to a male Avatar on the end of a ship. He's wearing a blue coat and a white hat, presumably made of animal skin. His eyes blink as well, and the camera zooms out, revealing a huge tidal wave behind the ship.)

(Cut to another female Avatar, whose eyes blink. She shoves her hands forward and the camera zooms out. Strong winds blow the yellow grass and trees in the distance.)

Roku: In the avatar state you are at your most powerful, (Cut to another male Avatar in red armor. He lifts his arms and four volcanoes erupt in the background. The lava covers the screen. Cut back to Roku and Aang on the dragon.) but you are also at your most vulnerable.
Aang: What do you mean?

(Cut to a close-up of Roku's face. The Avatars shown earlier can be seen on the clouds in the background. Roku and the Avatars suddenly vanish. They appear in a single-file line, their eyes glowing.)

Roku: If you are killed in the Avatar state, the reincarnation cycle will be broken and the Avatar will cease to exist.

(The Avatars vanish, ending with Roku, who fades away. Aang looks away sadly. Cut to the dragon, which spirals down toward the base. Cut to Aang's physical body, a sphere of wind surrounding him. The dragon crashes into his body and disappears, as does the sphere of wind. His body goes limp, and Aang falls to the ground, no longer glowing. The glances at the ruins of the base around him.)

(Cut to Katara, who runs toward the screen. Cut back to Aang, who is sitting on the ground with his arms on his knees. Katara runs up beside him and they embrace.)

Aang: (tired and remorseful) I'm sorry, Katara. I hope you never have to see me like that again. (The two look up as Fong begins to speak.)

(Cut to Fong, who walks forward, spreading his arms.)

General Fong: Hah! Are you joking? That was almost perfect! We just have to find a way to control you when you're like that.
Aang: You're out of your mind.
General Fong: (ignoring him) I guess we'll figure that out on the way to the Fire Nation.

(Sokka rides up behind him on the birdlike creature, holding his boomerang.)

Sokka: (bonks Fong on the head and knocks him out) Anybody got a problem with that? (Soldiers all shake their heads in unison)

(Sokka dismounts from the creature. The soldiers approach the others and bow. The creature runs off in the background.)

Soldier: Do you still want an escort to Omashu?
Katara: I think we're all set.

(Momo lands in Aang's arms.)

(Cut to outside the base. Appa flies off toward the screen.)

(Cut to the bathhouse. Azula stands in the foreground, holding up a poster with pictures of Iroh and Zuko and some writing.)

Azula: Anyone who harbors these traitors will face the wrath of the Fire Lord.

(Cut to a group of citizens looking up at Azula from below. Civilians cower in fear. Cut to a close-up of Azula's angry face.)

Azula: (menacingly) There will be no place left to hide.

(Cut to Zuko and Iroh on the run. Zuko's shadow is seen in a river. The two run down a path, pausing at a small body of water at the side of the river. They collapse onto their knees.)

Iroh: I think we're safe here.

(Zuko brings out a knife with some writing on the blade. He stares at it for a moment. Iroh nods solemnly and turns to Zuko. Zuko takes the knife and brings it behind his head and... cuts off his pony tail. He passes the knife to Iroh, who does the same. Cut to a close-up of Zuko's hand as he releases the pony tail, letting it fall into the water. Zuko and Iroh's hair are seen floating down the river. Cut back to Zuko and Iroh, their backs to the camera as they look into the distance.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(The episode opens with a daytime shot of the sky and cliffs covered in vegetation. The camera pans down and to the right to show that the cliffs have been cut by a river that runs at its bottom. Three figures appear in the river near a sand beach on its far bank. Two of the figures, Aang and Katara face each other like gunslingers in front of a natural arch of stone that protrudes from the cliff wall. The third, Sokka, rides lazily in a boat made of an enormous leaf.)

Sokka: You guys are gonna be done soon, right?

(Cut to a side shot of Sokka floating past the camera in the foreground. He is naked except for a white loincloth. His hair is no longer in a pony tail and now lies tangled in a wet mass on his head. In the background, Katara too has dispensed with her normal blue garb. She wears the equivalent of a white two piece bathing suit. She is in a bending stance as she faces Aang across from her, who is naked from the waist up and also in a martial arts stance.)

Sokka: We've got a lot of ground to cover if we wanna make it to Omashu today.

(Katara drops her bending stance and slumps over at Sokka's statement, then turns to face him with an arched eyebrow as she replies.)

Katara: (teasingly) What, like you're ready to go right now, naked guy?
Sokka: I can be ready in two minutes. Seriously. (He lifts his hair to look at them and lets his arm drop lazily back into the water.) Whenever.
Aang: So, you were showing me the octopus form.
Katara: Right. Let me see your stance. (evaluates Aang's form and comes over to correct it) Your arms are too far apart. See, if you move them closer together you protect your center. You got it?
Aang: (blushing, slightly flustered) Oh... yeah. Thanks.

(She drops her hold on him and walks back to her former position. She turns around to face him once again in a bending stance.)

Katara: Okay, let's see what you got.

(Cut to a shot of Aang's feet in the water. His hands enter the shot from above as he raises some water from the river. Cut to a wider shot as Aang finishes pulling up a large blob of water. With a smooth motion he causes the blob to sprout about a dozen, wide tentacles. Katara then begins to rapid fire icicles at him. The first one is grabbed and deflected in mid air by one of Aang's water tentacles. After several more are deflected, cut to Katara, back to the camera, legs wide apart, raising, freezing and shooting ice projectiles at Aang who is off screen to the right. Cut back to Aang, who dodges Katara's icicles and then uses one of his water tentacles to lash at Katara who is off screen to the left. Cut back to a close shot of Katara from the front. She is slightly surprised as Aang's water tentacle grabs her leg and yanks tight. Then she straightens, places her hands on her hips and smiles as she addresses the Avatar.)

Katara: You make a fine octopus, Pupil Aang.

(Cut back to Aang, who is now encased in the bubble of water, his arms and, consequently, his tentacles waving lazily around him. He is clearly having fun imitating an octopus. Cut to Sokka still lying in his leaf boat, Momo draped across him. Momo raises his head, his head and ears filling most of the screen and blocking Sokka as music and singing is heard from off camera.

Cut to a wide shot of the kids in the water looking towards the beach from where the sounds are coming from, then cut to a view from somewhere along the path to the beach within the forest. A group of travelers dressed in colorful mix of Asian and Polynesian styles walk by playing instruments and singing. The one carrying a guitar like instrument and wearing a wreath of flowers begins to sing softly.)

Chong: (singing) Don't fall in love with a traveling girl. She'll leave you broke and broken hearted...

(Cut to a frontal shot of the troupe as they sing and dance their way forward. The woman on his left wears black and pink, has big hair adorned with a single flower and plays a flute. A rotund fellow behind him wears a white and pink robe, a coolie hat and plays a drum.

Cut back to the kids in the river watching them approach. Suddenly, Sokka's leaf boats capsizes and he yells as he falls into the water. Cut back to the singers as they stop, finally noticing the kids.)

Chong: (smiling and pointing briefly at them) Heh-hey! River people!
Katara: (gesturing negatively with her hands as Sokka resurfaces behind her, Momo landing on his hand) We're not river people.
Chong: You're not? Well then what kind of people are ya?
Aang: Just... people.
Chong: (pleased) Aren't we all, brother? Whoo.

(Sokka walks into the shot from the left, still mostly naked and with Momo perched on his shoulder. He has grown noticeably since the prior season.)

Sokka: (with an accusing finger pointed at Chong) Who're you?
Chong: I'm Chong, and this is my wife Lily. (He indicates the woman on the left. She makes a little curtsy.) We're nomads, happy to go wherever the wind takes us!

(He riffs on his guitar like a real world rock star for a moment, his voice not matching the various random notes he plays.)

Aang: You guys are nomads That's great! I'm a nomad.
Chong: Hey, me too.
Aang: (flatly) I know... you just said that.
Chong: Oh. (His attention wanders elsewhere, then to Sokka) Nice underwear.

(Cut to close shot of Sokka and his mostly naked body, Aang and Katara behind him. His eyes bulge at the sudden realization that he is wearing very little in front of complete strangers. He grabs Momo and places him strategically over his body and sidles rapidly off the screen.

(Cut to a close up shot of Iroh's face. He is looking a pretty white and red flower in the foreground. Cut to a wider shot of Iroh squatting in front of the plant, mesmerized. He is in a forest and is wearing a dark green shirt and trousers. A bush begins moving in the background and a series of grunts are heard as Zuko, clad similar to his Uncle, emerges from it. Short black hair now covers his head.)

Zuko: (frustrated) I didn't find anything to eat. I can't live like this. I wasn't meant to be a fugitive. (kicks at the ground angrily) This is impossible!

(Iroh sniffs the flower deeply.)

Zuko: (more calmly) Uncle... what are you doing?
Iroh: You're looking at the rare white dragon bush. (lovingly) Its leaves make a tea so delicious it's heartbreaking! (gravely) That, or it's the white jade bush, which is poisonous.
Zuko: We need food, not tea. I'm going fishing.

(Zuko exits right.)

Iroh: (still contemplating and stroking his chin) Delectable tea? Or deadly poison?

(Cut to a close up of Appa's left eye. Around his eyebrow lie several braided locks of his fur which are adorned with many small, pink flowers. Appa groans. His eye looks up as the camera pans up to reveal one of the nameless members of Chong's troupe braiding his hair. Cut to a wide shot of Appa lying down on the beach in front of the river. Everyone but Sokka is lying on or close to Appa listening to Chong play his instrument. Sokka himself approaches from the left side of the screen.)

Aang: Hey, Sokka, you should hear some of these stories. These guys have been everywhere.
Chong: (stops playing) Well, not everywhere, Little Arrowhead. But where we haven't been we've heard about through stories and songs.

(Cut to frontal shot of Sokka who raises an eyebrow in skepticism at this.)

Aang: They said they'll take us to see a giant night crawler.
Moku: (dreamily) On the way there's a waterfall that creates a never-ending rainbow.
Sokka: (firmly) Look, I hate to be the wet blanket here, but since Katara is busy I guess it's up to me. (Katara, whose hair is being braided by Lily, looks crossly up at Sokka at this) We need to get to Omashu. (Counting off the verboten distractions on his hand) No sidetracks, no worms, and definitely no rainbows.
Chong: Whoa... sounds like someone's got a case of "destination fever," heh. You're worried too much about where you're going.
Lily: You've gotta focus less on the "where" and more on the "going."
Sokka: (emphatically) O. Ma. Shu.

(Sokka's face gets further distended and exaggerated with each syllable until his warped features almost fill the screen.)

Katara: Sokka's right. We need to find King Bumi so Aang can learn earthbending somewhere safe.
Chong: Well, sounds like you're headed to Omashu. (Sokka smacks his forehead loudly at this.) There's an old story about a secret pass... (ominously) ...right through the mountains.
Katara: (skeptically) Is this real or a legend?
Chong: Oh, it's a real legend. And it's as old as earthbending itself. (starts playing his guitar and sings) Two lovers, forbidden from one another... a war divides their people, and a mountain divides them apart. Built a path to be together. (stops and says normally) Yeah, and I forget the next couple of lines, but then it goes... (sings enthusiastically as everyone else dances) Secret tunnel! Secret tunnel! Through the mountain! Secret, secret, secret, secret tunnel! Yeah!

(Everyone enjoys the song except Sokka, who looks miserable. On the last note, Chong concludes his chord with a flourish that leaves his left index finger pointed to the sky in a gesture of triumph. His audience, except Sokka, claps enthusiastically.)

Sokka: I think we'll just stick with flying. We've dealt with the Fire Nation before. We'll be fine.
Aang: Yeah. Thanks for the help, but Appa hates going underground and we need to do whatever makes Appa most comfortable.

(Aang smiles widely at the end of this statement. Abrupt cut to a shot of a Fire Nation Commander in front of two long lines of Fire Nation catapults. The screen expands to show even more catapults in the surrounding area.)

Commander: Launch!

(All the catapults fire simultaneously. Cut to Appa in mid flight, fireballs closing in around him. Appa opens his mouth to grunt and the camera angle flies right into it. Cut to Appa dodging fireballs at high speed, the cut to a close up of the kids on Appa's back.)

Aang, Sokka, and Katara: (terrified) AAAAAHHHHH!

(Cut to Chong and his band sitting by a log in the forest. The kids enter from the left, covered in ash and looking depressed.)

Sokka: (unenthusiastically) Secret love cave. Let's go.

(Cut to a shot of the forest canopy. It is still daytime. The camera pans down and stops as Zuko enters the frame from the right. He carries a long fishing pole and a sour expression. The camera pans right to reveal the present source of Zuko's misery. At the end of his enormous fishing pole he has succeeding in spearing what looks like a minnow. It wiggles pathetically. Zuko begins to speak from o.c., then cut to wide, overhead shot of Zuko standing behind Iroh from a point somewhere in the upper branches of a nearby tree.)

Iroh: Zuko, remember that plant that I thought might be tea?
Zuko: (horrified) You didn't!
Iroh: I did. (Iroh turns around to reveal his red, swollen face which he is scratching) And it wasn't.
Zuko: (in repulsion) Yah!
Iroh: (calmly while scratching) When the rash spreads to my throat, I will stop breathing. (excitedly) But look what I found! These are bacui berries, known to cure the poison of the white jade plant. That, or macahoni berries that cause blindness.
Zuko: (losing his patience) We're not taking any more chances with these plants! We need to get help.
Iroh: But where are we going to go? We're enemies of the Earth Kingdom, and fugitives from the Fire Nation.
Zuko: (musingly) If the Earth Kingdom, discovers us, they'll have us killed.
Iroh: But if the Fire Nation discovers us, we'll be turned over to Azula.

(They look at each other and nod in agreement.)

Zuko: Earth Kingdom it is.

(Iroh and Zuko walk off the screen to the right as the show cuts to a wide of Appa, the kids and Chong's group walking along a wide street lined with what look like the ruins of temples.)

Sokka: How far are we from the tunnel.
Chong: Actually, it's not just one tunnel. The lovers didn't want anyone to find out about their love, so they built a whole labyrinth.

(Sokka turns to face the others in a pose of horror, his hands holding the sides of his head.)

Sokka: Labyrinth !
Chong: I'm sure we'll figure it out.

(Sokka turns and begins walking again. The rest follow.)

Lily: All you need to do is trust in love. According to the curse.

(At this Sokka stops, standing bolt upright. The others pass him.)

Sokka: (in exasperation) Curse!

(Cut to a long shot of the top of a gulley or small canyon. The camera pans down to reveal the moss covered entrance to a large tunnel in the cliff face. The group stands in front of it. The tunnel is so large that Appa can easily be accommodated.)

Chong: Hey-hey, we're here!

(Cut to a shot of a plaque with some writing on the wall of the cave entrance. Sokka speaks from o.c.)

Sokka: What exactly is this curse?

(Cut to a wide overhead shot of the group from the viewpoint of the top of the cave entrance.)

Chong: The curse says that only those who trust in love can make it through the caves. Otherwise you'll be trapped in them forever.
Lily: And die.
Chong: Oh, yeah, and die. Hey, I just remembered the rest of that song. (strums a chord on his guitar and sings low and dramatically) And die!
Sokka: (aggravated) That's it! There's no way we're going througbrh some cursed hole!

(Cut to a shot of Moku and the two nameless members of Chong's band. Behind them in the distance a shaft of smoke curls towards the heavens. Moku and the others turn and see the smoke.)

Moku: (cheerfully and pointing at the column of smoke) Hey, someone's making a big campfire!
Katara: That's no campfire, Moku.
Sokka: That's Fire Nation. They're tracking us.

(Cut to a wider shot of the group from behind, with Chong in the foreground and Aang and Katara in the background, their backs to the camera. Aang looks over his shoulder at Chong with an uncertain expression.)

Aang: So all you need is to trust in love to get through these caves?
Chong: That is correct, Master Arrowhead.

(Aang turns to look at Katara. Cut to a close up shot of Katara's back, where a soft breeze blows her hair and robes slightly. Cut to a close up shot of Aang's eyes, shining with adoration, that pans slowly right. Cut back to the wider shot of Aang, Katara and Chong. Aang turns away from Katara and looks back at Chong with a smile.)

Aang: We can make it.
Sokka: Everyone into the hole!

(The group makes its way slowly into the tunnel, Appa groaning in protest, but still following.

Cut a long shot of a Fire Nation tank rapidly approaching the camera, then cut to another overhead shot from the cavern entrance. Several tanks pull to a stop in front of the cave entrance. Cut to a close up shot of the Commander in his tank.)

Commander: (o.c.) Hold on! It's too dangerous. (cut to him half out of his tank) Haven't you heard the song? Just close them in. The mountain will take care of the rest.

(Cut to a frontal shot of the tanks. The canister containing the projectile grappling hooks rotates upward. The tanks fire their grappling hooks into the top of the tunnel and pulls down a large amount of rock, completely blocking the entrance. Cut to an interior shot of the cave where the group turns in horror as the cave entrance collapses. Fade to black for commercial break.)



Act II

(The show returns to reveal a dark, overhead shot of the group inside the tunnel. Appa, on his hind legs, frantically tries to dig his way out of the trap.)

Katara: (sympathetically) It's okay, Appa. We'll be fine. (less confidently) I hope.

(Cut to a shot of Sokka, Chong behind him holding a lit torch.)

Sokka: We will be fine. All we need is a plan. Chong, how long do those torches last?
Chong: Eh, about two hours each.
Lily: And we have five torches so that's... (she takes the other four torches she is holding a strikes then on the ground like matches, lighting them instantly) ten hours.
Sokka: (while grabbing and stomping out the torches she lit) It doesn't work like that if they're all lit at the same time!
Lily: (spacey) Ohh, right.
Sokka: I'm gonna make a map to keep track of exactly where we've been. Then we should be able to solve it like a maze and get through.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the group as they slowly move deeper into the tunnel, followed by a cut to an exterior shot of an Earth Kingdom village by a lake, followed by a quick cut of the exterior of the village's hospital. The scene shifts rapidly to an interior shot of a room where a doctor is working with a patient who is on a table in front of him on his back. The camera pans right to reveal Iroh sitting on another table, naked from the waist up, being attended by Song, a young woman who is a healer at the hospital. Iroh is covered with the red rash from eating the white jade flower. Song is applying a clay like substance to the rash. Zuko sits behind the young woman in the background, a coolie hat obscuring his face as he looks toward the floor.)

Song: You two must not be from around here. We know better than to touch the white jade, much less make it into tea and drink it.
Iroh: (sheepishly) Heh heh heh. Whoops!
Song: So where are you traveling from?
Zuko: (standing and talking quickly) Yes, we're travelers.
Song: Do you have names?
Zuko: (hesitantly) Names Of course we have names. I'm... Lee. And this is my uncle, uh... Mushi.

(Iroh shoots him an unhappy look from behind Song's back.)

Iroh: (facetiously) Yes, but my nephew was named after his father, so we just call him Junior.

(Iroh looks over Song's shoulder at "Junior," who balls his fists at the name his uncle has just bestowed on him.)

Song: Mushi and Junior, huh? My name is Song. You two look like you could use a good meal. (She turns and swats Iroh's hand away scratching his rash) Why don't you stay for dinner
Zuko: Sorry, but we need to be moving on.
Song: That's too bad. My mom always makes too much roast duck.

(Iroh's puffy, clay smeared face enters from the right side of the frame to a humorous sound effect.)

Iroh: Where do you live, exactly?

(Cut back to the tunnel, where Sokka is fooling around with a map, the others stand behind him.)

Katara: Sokka, this is the tenth dead end you've led us to.
Sokka: This doesn't make any sense; we already came through this way.
Chong: We don't need a map. We just need love. (Pointing over to Aang) The little guy knows it.
Aang: Yeah, but I wouldn't mind a map, also.
Sokka: There's something strange here. There's only one explanation. The tunnels are changing.

(A low rumble through the tunnel startles everyone into looking up, then cut to a night shot of the exterior of Song and her mother's house. Cut to an interior shot where Zuko, Iroh and Song are seated at a knee high, Asian styled table. Song's mother approaches the table with a plate of roast duck.)

Song's Mother: (seating herself) My daughter tells me you're refugees. We were once refugees ourselves.
Song: When I was a little girl, the Fire Nation raided our farming village. All the men were taken away. (sadly) That was the last time I saw my father.

(Cut to a close up of Zuko's eyes as Song finishes and during his reply he lowers his gaze.)

Zuko: I haven't seen my father in many years.
Song: Oh. Is he fighting in the war?

(Iroh finishes slurping a mouthful of noodles as he looks with some trepidation at his nephew to see how he will answer this dangerous question. Zuko puts his bowl on the table and replies.)

Zuko: Yeah.

(Zuko looks away as the camera cuts back to the tunnel.)

Chong: (worried) The tunnels... they're a-changin'. Ah, it must be the curse. I knew we shouldn't have come down here.
Sokka: (cynically) Right. If only we listened to you.
Katara: Everyone be quiet. Listen.

(Sounds are heard in the darkness ahead. Momo jumps off Sokka's shoulder and flies off into the darkness. Sokka looks ahead. Cut to Sokka's p.o.v., which is the pitch blackness ahead. After a few seconds, a wolf bat flies right into the camera. Cut to a wider shot of the group as Sokka is knocked over by the bat, which flies around the group members. )

Chong: It's a giant flying thing with teeth!
Moku: (o.c.) No! It's a wolf-bat!

(The wolf bat lands on four legs, and folds it wings. After snarling a bit, it launches back into the air and flies over the heads of the group. Sokka tries to burn it with the torch, but fails. Appa gets burned and stampedes around the tunnel. Finally the wolf-bat knocks the torch out of Sokka's hand. It sails through the air and lands on Appa's toe. Appa rear up and cries out in pain. He runs around in anguish, hitting the cave walls and causing a cave in. As the roof collapses Aang sends a blast of air to get Chong, Sokka and the others out the falling debris' way. Then he turns and tackles Katara to the ground to protect her. When the dust settles, Aang, Katara and Appa are separated from Sokka and Chong's party.

Cut to Sokka and the others on the opposite side of the cave in. Sokka runs to the obstruction and begins to dig frantically. Chong appears over his shoulder.)

Chong: (calmly) Yeah, it's no use. We're separated. But at least you have us, heh heh.

(Sokka freezes for a moment as this statement sinks in. Then unleashes a howl of despair.)

Sokka: Noooooooo!

(He beings digging frantically again at the rocks and causes a mini cave in on his head.

Cut to a shot of a large porch lamp, then to a wide shot of to Zuko sitting cross legged on Song's porch. Song exits the house, walks over and sits beside him.)

Song: (kindly) Can I join you? I know what you've been through. We've all been through it. The Fire Nation has hurt you.

(She reaches out to touch his scar, but Zuko grabs her hand without looking before she reaches his face.)

Song: It's okay. They've hurt me, too.

(She raises the part of her dress covering her right leg to reveal a firebending scar. Cut to a close up of Zuko's shocked face.

Shift back to Sokka and Chong's band. The troupe sings as Sokka leads them on, scowling.)

Chong: (singing cheerfully) Oh, don't let the cave in get you down. Don't let the falling rocks turn your smile into a frown. When the tunnels are darkest that's when you need a clown, hey! Don't let the cave in get you down, Sokka!

(Sokka looks sidewise at Chong who is now obviously singing to the dour water tribe boy.

Cut to Aang, Appa and Katara walking through their own tunnel. Katara leads them holding a lit torch.)

Katara: Aang, look!

(Cut to a wide, long shot of a huge, round stone door ahead of them. They run to it.)

Aang: We found the exit!

(They both begin to strain with effort trying to push the door open. Appa lumbers forward and begins to make noises. Aang and Katara turn to see Appa pawing the ground and snorting. They look at each other in alarm, realizing Appa's intentions. They jump out of the frame just as Appa charges the door and forces it open. Cut to a shot from behind the door, as cracks of light show around the frame of the door as it opens. Cut to a wider shot as the door swings open to reveal the three. Aang and Katara enter and move deeper into the chamber.)

Katara: This isn't the exit.
Aang: No... it's a tomb.

(They move forward to a railing, then cut to a long shot of the three at the railing from down inside the tomb near the sarcophagi. Appa grunts and the view fades to black for a commercial break.



Act III

The show returns to a wide, long shot of Aang and Katara descending a wide staircase leading to the sarcophagi at the center of the crypt. They approach the dais on which the two coffins rest.)

Aang: It must be the two lovers from the legend. That's who's buried here.

(Cut to Katara holding her torch up to the side of the dais. A series of paintings and writing adorn the side of the dais.)

Katara: These pictures tell their story.

(Cut to a wide shot as Aang and Katara look at each other for a second, the cut to a shot from behind them, the paintings and writing visible between them. The camera closes in on the paintings. As the camera closes in on a drawing of a mountain, the screen flashes white. When the image returns, the image is now in letterbox format. The animation is different as well. It is highly stylized and looks as if it were from Japanese panel art. The image is still of the mountain and the camera closes in upon it fast. As the images unfold, Katara narrates from o.c.)

Katara: (voice-over) They met on top of the mountain that divided their two villages.

(The mountain fades away, replaced by the image of a long haired woman in pink and a man in blue on top of the mountain. She holds the branch or a red leafed tree in her hand. This fades, replaced by a close up image of their hands touching. Quickly, their hands separate, a Chinese character appearing between their hands.)

Katara: (voice-over) The villages were enemies so they could not be together.

(At this the character turns blood red, and the peaceful background becomes pink and sooty.)

Katara: (voice-over) But their love was strong and they found a way.

(The character fades in turn and is replaced by a scene of the woman, dressed in red, kneeling on his a hill overlooking a panoramic landscape. The camera zooms backward and a new hill enters the foreground. On it stands the man in blue, gazing longingly at the woman in red. This fades and is replaced by a shot of another painting from the side of the dais. This painting is of a large animal with claws.)

Katara: (voice-over) The two lovers learned earthbending from the badger moles. They became the first earthbenders.

(The painting of the badger mole is replaced by a more realistic depiction of the creature, and the woman in red appears on the creature's right, the man on the left. The badger mole disappears, replaced by a shot of the man and woman, backs to each other, creating tunnels through earthbending. This fades and is replaced by a map of the resulting labyrinth, a maze of tunnels.)

Katara: (voice-over) They built elaborate tunnels so they could meet secretly. Anyone who tried to follow them would be lost forever in the labyrinth.

(A hole appears in the middle of this map that shows the two lovers kissing.)

Katara: (voice-over) But one day the man didn't come.

(The cameo of the two lovers sharing a kiss is replaced by a shot of the woman looking to her right in vain, encased in a halo of white, the rest of the background in red.)

Katara: He died in the war between their two villages.

(A set of black arrows arcs across the sky and across the woman's form. This fades to a shot of the woman kneeling over her lover's grave, heartbroken, her hands holding her face in grief.)

Katara: (voice-over) Devastated, the woman unleashed a terrible display of her earthbending power. She could have destroyed them all.

(A close up of the woman's face is replaced by a shot of her standing atop a mountain, a red sun behind her, as the camera zooms backward. She stands head lowered, her arms straight out from her sides and her palms facing outward. As the camera zooms backward, huge columns of rock enter from the bottom of the screen.)

Katara: (voice-over) But instead she declared the war over.

(The red sun, columns of rock and general uproar fade, replaced by the woman still atop of the mountain, but this time with a peaceful new day where she is surrounded by cheering villagers.)

Katara: Both villages helped her build a new city where they would live together in peace.

(Fade to a shot of the city of Omashu. As the shot settles, a blank parchment appears in the middle of the screen, partially obscuring the city.)

Katara: (voice-over) The woman's name was Oma and the man's name was Shu. The great city was named Omashu as a monument to their love.

(As their names are spoken, their names appear on the parchment. When complete, the screen flashes white. When the scene returns, it is in normal pan-scan format. Katara still points to the picture of the city of Omashu. Cut to a frontal shot of Aang and Katara who look at each other in wonder, then turn to look behind them. There they see a statue of the two lovers kissing, a plaque with writing between them.)

Katara: (reading the inscription) Love is brightest in the dark.

(A wide shot of them looking at the statue is replaced by a shot of Sokka again looking at his map, Momo perched on his head.)

Moku: Oh, great! Your plans have led us to another dead end!
Sokka: (defensively) At least I'm thinking of ideas and trying to get us out of here, Moku.
Chong: Whoa, whoa, wait a minute; we're thinking of ideas! 'Cause I've had an idea for, like, an hour now.
Sokka: (explodes) Yes! We're all thinking of ideas!
Chong: Well, then listen to this: if love is the key out of here, then all we need to do is play a love song.

(Cut to a close of Sokka. Momo jumps off his head and he smacks his forehead again. Off camera Chong begins to strum his guitar.

Cut back to Aang, Katara and Appa in front of the statue.)

Aang: How are we gonna find our way out of these tunnels?
Katara: I have a crazy idea.
Aang: What?
Katara: (hesitantly) Never mind, it's too crazy.

(Katara turns away from Aang, looking a little bashful.)

Aang: Katara, what is it?
Katara: I was thinking... the curse says we'll be trapped in here forever unless we trust in love.
Aang: Right...
Katara: And here it says 'love is brightest in the dark' and... (she turns to face him, but doesn't yet meet his eyes) has a picture of them kissing.
Aang: (totally clueless) Where are you going with this?

(Cut to a close up of Katara's face, her eyes still averted.)

Katara: (shyly) Well... what if we kissed?

(She finally look up at him, with a slightly dreamy, slightly hopeful expression on her face. She blushes visibly even in the darkness. Cut to Aang who doesn't react for a second, then speaks.)

Aang: (surprised) Us, kissing?
Katara: See? It was a crazy idea.

(She turns away from Aang, who himself turns to face the camera.)

Aang: (dreamily) Us... kissing...
Katara: (tries to laugh it off) Us kissing. What was I thinking? Can you imagine that?
Aang: (also tries to laugh it off) Yeah, heh, heh. (He points at her for additional emphasis) I definitely wouldn't wanna kiss you!

(Aang's eyes bug out a moment after his last comment as he realized the dreadful mistake he has just made.)

Katara: (offended) Oh, well I didn't realize it was such a horrible option. (Leaning over at him in anger) Sorry I suggested it!
Aang: (trying desperately to recover) No, no, I mean... if there was a choice between kissing you and dying...

(The sound of a symbol crashing is heard as Aang utters this relationship stifling comment. Katara, further insulted, turns away with a noise of indignation. Aang approaches and is visible over her shoulder.)

Aang: What? I'm saying I'd rather kiss you than die. (He holds clasps his hands together in a gesture of appeasement) That's a compliment.
Katara: (turning to Aang, infuriated) Well, I'm not sure which I would rather do!

(Katara stalks off the right side of the shot.)

Aang: (dejected) What is wrong with me?

(He walks off as the sound of Chong's guitar is heard, indicating another transition. Cut to Sokka and the rest of the group walking through a tunnel.)

Chong: (singing) Even if you're lost you can't lose the love because it's in your heart, ooooohhhhh...

(Fade to black, then cut to Zuko and Iroh leaving Song's house. They stand in her courtyard. It is still night, and fireflies buzz lazily around them all. Song and her mother stand ready to bid them goodbye.)

Iroh: (graciously) Thank you for the duck. It was excellent.
Song's Mother: You're welcome. (She hands him a package, presumably of leftover roast duck) It brings me joy to see someone eat my cooking with such... gusto.
Iroh: (patting his stomach) Much practice. (Zuko turns to leave, but Iroh stops him.) Junior, where are your manners? You need to thank these nice people.

(Zuko turns and offers a small bow, his face still obscured by his coolie hat.)

Zuko: (quietly, without much feeling) Thank you.
Song: (quickly) I know you don't think there's any hope left in the world, but there is hope. The Avatar has returned!

(Cut to a close up of the left side of Zuko's face, song visible in the background behind him.)

Zuko: (quietly, but intensely) I know.

(He walks off, Iroh in tow. As they pass the courtyard gate the see a stable where a war ostrich is tethered. Zuko stops, looks at the animal, and then looks back at the courtyard. He releases the ostrich and begins to lead it away with them.)

Iroh: (appalled) What are you doing? These people just showed you great kindness.
Zuko: They're about to show us a little more kindness. (offers his hand to Iroh) Well?

(Iroh looks down, dreadfully unhappy with this turn of events. Cut to Zuko and Iroh riding away on the ostrich, then cut to a close up of Song looking out from her front door. She is crushed. She looks down in sadness and closes the door.

Cut back to Aang and Katara walking through the tunnel with Appa.)

Aang: (gloomily) We're gonna run out of light any second now, aren't we?
Katara: I think so.
Aang: Then what are we gonna do?
Katara: What can we do?

(Cut to a shot of Aang's mid section, his hand in front of him holding the dwindling torch. The simple string music from the Omashu story begins to play softly in the background. The camera pans up to show Aang looking at Katara, smiling, then cut to a shot of Katara faces, her eyes serious, the camera panning slowly rightward. Cut to a wider, side shot of them both. They lean in to each other as the torch falters and goes out.

After a moment of darkness, the screen is lit by an assortment of gems in the ceiling that glow light blue. These are shortly joined by many more. The screen pans down to reveal that the crystals form a path in the ceiling of the tunnel. When the pan comes to stop, Aang and Katara stand beside each other, one hand each on the burnt out torch. Both look up at the crystals in wonder.

Cut back to a long, wide shot of Sokka and the others walking along the tunnel. Chong is still strumming his guitar. He stops, though, when ominous sounds begin to echo through the darkness. Cut to Sokka rubbing his head in frustration with his companions. He stops this and Momo jumps from his shoulder as the noises continue.

Out of the darkness a huge pack of wolf-bats emerges. The fly over and around Sokka, who flails frantically about. They are gone in an instant, flying down the tunnel.)

Chong: (happily) Hey-hey, you saved us, Sokka!
Sokka: No, they were trying to get away from something.
Chong: From what?

(Behind them the rocks explode and the tunnel around them quakes. A furry, brown badger mole appears from the dust. Cut to a wide shot of the group, surprised expressions on their faces. Behind them another explosion of rock reveals another badger mole. They are surrounded.

The badger mole in front of Sokka bends earth around the water tribe boy, pinning him down and separating him from the others. The creature stomps the ground in front of him and knocks Sokka backwards onto the ground.

As Sokka inches backwards away from the advancing badger mole, his fingers accidentally strum one of Chong's guitars discarded on the ground in the shuffle. Cut to a shot of the badger mole's face, as he stops his advance and puzzles over Sokka.

Cut to Sokka, looking up, expecting to get killed. He realizes what is going on, gets up with the guitar and starts strumming.)

Chong: Hey, those things are music lovers!
Sokka: (trying to sing to the one note he's strumming and not doing very well) Badger moles, coming toward me. Come on guys, help me out.

(Chong and his troupe stand and begin to play their instruments and sing.)

Chong: (singing) The big bad badger moles who work in the tunnels, hate the wolf bats but love the sounds.

(Cut to a wide shot of Aang, Katara and Appa in the tunnel lit by the luminescent crystals.)

Aang: It's made of some kind of crystals. They must only light up in the dark!

(Cut to a close up shot of Aang and Katara facing each other, their hands laced together.)

Katara: That's how the two lovers found each other. They just put out their lights and followed the crystals.

(She lets go of his hand as the camera pans down the tunnel. She points down the tunnel.)

Katara: That must be the way out!

(They hug.)

Aang: (uncertainly) So... um...
Katara: (excitedly) Let's go!

(Aang looks after her and smiles slightly. He follows with Appa close behind. Cut to an exterior view of the mountain, the tunnel exit clearly visible. Appa emerges from the tunnel at a gallop, stops, rears up on his hind legs and flops on his back. He is clearly happy to be outside once again. Aang and Katara, backs to the camera, enter the frame.)

Aang: (worried) What about Sokka?

(Before he can answer, the camera cuts to a wide shot of the exit tunnel landing. Appa rolls back to his feet as a rumbling is hears. Two holes are blown open next to the tunnel exit to reveal the tow badger moles. Sokka and Momo ride atop one of these fierce creatures. Cut to Katara who shields her face from the flying debris, but recognizes her brother when she looks up.)

Katara: Sokka!

(Cut to a wide shot of the badger mole as Sokka slides down the side of the animal and runs over to Katara.)

Sokka: How did you guys get out?
Aang: Just like the legend says: we let love lead the way.
Sokka: Really? We let huge ferocious beasts lead our way.

(Sokka turns and waves goodbye to the badger moles. Cut to a wide, overhead shot as everyone waves the badger moles goodbye. They turn and enter the two holes the created to exit the mountain, closing them up with their earthbending powers after they passed through.

Cut to Momo landing in front of Appa. Momo begins to chitter excitedly, clearly telling Appa the story of what happened after they got separated. Momo begins to make hand gestures to illustrate his tale as Appa grunts and puts his head on his forepaw as he listens to Momo's explanation.

The camera pans over to Katara hugging her brother. They break the embrace as Katara questions her brother.)

Katara: Why is your forehead all red?

(Cut to a close shot of Sokka looking sour, his forehead indeed red. Katara stands back to the camera in the foreground. Before Sokka can answer, Chong leans into the frame and begins to whisper conspiratorially.)

Chong: (dead serious) Nobody react to what I'm about to tell you. I think that kid might be the Avatar.

(Sokka smacks his forehead again, answering Katara's question. Sokka's eye steal over to the singer before the shot cuts a wide shot of Aang addressing the rest of Chong's troupe.)

Aang: So, are you guys gonna come to Omashu with us?
Moku: Nope.
Aang: Okay. Thanks for everything, Moku.

(The camera pans back to Chong, Sokka and Katara. Chong takes his flower necklace and places it aroun Itd Sokka's neck.)

Chong: Sokka, I hope you learned a little something about not letting the plans get in the way of the journey.

(Chong hugs Sokka.)

Sokka: (sullenly, but also blushing) Just play your songs.

(Chong releases him at such an excellent suggestion.)

Chong: Hey, good plan! (singing) Even if you're lost you can't lose the love because it's in your heart. Ooooohhhh...

(As Chong's sings o.c., Aang looks sideways at Katara, and Katara looks down and blushes.

The camera pans up to the kids walking up a hill or small mountain. Some time has passed since Chong's departure, but it is still daytime.)

Sokka: The journey was long and annoying, but now you get to see what it's really about - the destination.

(As the mount the top of the hill, the camera angle begins to whirl around Sokka, ultimately revealing the city in front of them.)

Sokka: I present to you the Earth Kingdom city of O... (devastated with realization) Oh, no...

(In front of Sokka lies the devastated fortress city of Omashu. It is surrounded by what appear to be siege towers. The city is smoking and appears to be on fire in several places. Cut to a shot panning down of the city. The pan stops on the main gate, where hangs the flag of the Fire Nation.

Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(The scene opens with a shot of the sun in the sky. An instant later the camera zooms back to reveal a Fire Nation flag in the foreground, fluttering in the wind. Cut to a wide, long shot of the fallen city of Omashu. The Fire Nation flag hangs over the newly installed front gate. The path up to the city gate has been recently broken along a good portion of its length and been repaired. Around the fortress the scaffolding of what appear to be siege towers can be seen. Columns of smoke still rise from various places in the city. The camera zooms back again to show Aang in the foreground, back to the camera.)

Aang: I can't believe it. I know the war has spread far, (he turns to face his friends) but Omashu always seemed...untouchable.

(Cut to a frontal shot of Aang, again looking at the fallen city. Aang, Katara, Momo and Appa are behind him.)

Sokka: Up until now, it was. Now Ba-Sing-Se is the only great Earth Kingdom stronghold left.
Katara: This is horrible, but we have to move on.
Aang: (firmly) No. I'm going in to find Bumi.
Sokka: Aang, stop. We don't even know if Bumi's still...

(Aang turns to look at Sokka, his expression hardening.)

Aang: (defiantly) What? If he's still what?
Sokka: (refusing to meet Aang's eyes) ...around.
Katara: I know you had your heart set on Bumi, but there are other people around who can teach you earthbending.
Aang: This isn't about finding a teacher. This is about finding my friend.

(Cut back to a wide, long shot of the smoking city, with the kids in the foreground. Then cut to a shot of the new city gate. It's turrets, guard house roofing and even the paifang in front of the main gate are all built in Fire Nation architectural style. Behind the city wall, smokestacks and scaffolding are seen.

The camera pans down the city wall and fades to indicate a location skip. The fade ends to show a long shot of Appa floating deep down in the city's moat. Appa floats beside a ledge at the base of the Omashu side of the moat. Appa grunts a bit as he floats.)

Sokka: (from o.c.) A secret passage?

(Cut to a shot of Katara, Momo on her shoulder, and Sokka standing in front of a capped drain pipe emerging from the wall. Aang is atop the pipe, using his staff as a lever to try and open the drain. Appa floats peacefully in the background.)

Sokka: Why didn't we just use this last time? (The cap pops off, releasing a huge gout of greenish sewage, some of which washes over Sokka.) Ugh!
Aang: Does that answer your question?

(Cut to a shot from inside the pipe. The greenish sewage continues to pour out of the pipe as Aang swings inside and disappears up the pipe, a smile on his face. Katara, Sokka and Momo look into the pipe and the flies that are buzzing around it. Sokka jumps into the pipe and covers his nose as he moves forward.)

Sokka: Ew!

(Cut to a side shot of Aang, a determined expression on his face, as he airbends the sewage out of his way with his staff. The camera pans slowly down the pipe to reveal Katara traveling in his wake, and then Sokka, who is making plenty of "ew!" and "ick!" noises as he is slowly covered in sewage from Aang's receding wake.

Cut to an exterior shot of an Omashu city street and its skyline. The camera pans down to reveal a sewer manhole in the middle of the road. A puff of air pops the manhole open for a second. It settles back for a moment before Aang pushes it open with his hands and peers out. Cut to his p.o.v. as he looks around. The street is empty. Cut to a wide shot of the street as Aang drops the manhole cover and jumps out into the open. Katara emerges behind him.)

Katara: That wasn't as bad as I thought.

(Cut to a shot of the manhole, where a blob of green sewage emerges. An alien like sound effect plays in the background as the things lifts itself onto the street. It moans like some monster from Scooby-Doo. Cut to Aang and Katara, who both look horrified. Katara spies something to her left, then cut quickly to a wider shot where she bends some water from a nearby water barrel at the monster. The water washes the gunk away to reveal Sokka, who yells in surprise, then slumps, sopping wet. Aang swings his staff at the water tribe boy, whipping a gale that blows him dry, once again producing an outcry from his target.

Cut to a close shot of Sokka, who raises his head to reveal two purple octopus like creatures stuck to either side of his head. He is unaware of his guests until a second later they both palpitate a bit and squeak.)

Sokka: Aaahhh!

(Sokka grabs one creature in each hand and tries to pull them from his face, but their suckers keep them attached. He stretches them out to an absurd distance, but still they hang on.)

Sokka: Aaahh! Aahhh! They won't let go! Help! Aaaak!

(Cut to a wider shot of the three as Aang pounces on Sokka, pinning him to the nearby wall, then releasing him. Sokka now sits on a crate, a sour and resigned look on his face.)

Aang: Stop making so much noise. It's just a purple pentapus.

(Cut to a close up of Sokka's face. The pentapus' begin to palpitate again, making slight squishing noises. Sokka's eyes bug out as he looks to either side of his face in horror and terrified, but slightly choked noises emerge from his throat.

Aang's hand enters the frame from the right and grips the nearest pentapus. He rubs its head with his finger. It raises its tentacles from Sokka's cheek and pops off his face without further fuss. Cut to a wider shot of Sokka and Aang. While rubbing his free cheek, Sokka repeats the process on the other side of his face. The other pentapus squeaks a bit and releases Sokka's right check with another little popping sound. The suckers on the tentacles have left little round red dots all over Sokka's cheeks. Sokka rubs his cheek for a second and Aang's removes a third pentapus from behind Sokka's neck before they are interrupted.)

Guard: (from o.c.) Hey!

(Cut to a patrol of Fire Nation guards entering the street, then cut back to the kids. Sokka and Katara close ranks to obscure Aang for a moment, who disappears and reappears a second later with a red, flat top hat on to hide his airbender tattoo.)

Guard: What are you kids doing out past curfew?
Katara: Sorry. We were just on our way home.

(The kids turn and walk away, Sokka bringing up the rear. The guard notices the red welts on the back of Sokka's neck.)

Guard: (from o.c.) Wait! What's the matter with him?

(The kids stop and turn around. Katara puts her hands on her brother's shoulders.)

Katara: Uh...he has pentapox, sir.

(The guard walks up to Sokka, and moves to touch him.)

Katara: (a pleasing, earnest look in her eyes) Um...it's highly contagious!

(The guard hesitates, then pulls his hand back. Cut to a close up of Sokka's face, who realizes the ploy and begins to act ill. He raises his hands in front of him in a zombie-like fashion and begins to moan.)

Sokka: Uuuuuu....It's so awful...I'm dyiiiing...
Katara: ...and deadly...

(Sokka continues to moan and lurch forward, the guards begin to lurch backward to avoid contact.)

Guard: Wait, I think I've heard of pentapox. (to one of his comrades) Didn't your cousin Chang die of it?

(Sokka advances, coughing and spitting up gunk at them)

Guard: We'd better go wash our hands...and burn our clothes!

(Guards exit the left of the frame at a run. Sokka stops his act and straighten up. Cut to a shot of Aang in the foreground, Sokka behind. The Avatar, smiling, is rubbing the head of a pentapus he holds his hand.)

Aang: Thank you, sewer friend!

(Cut to a long, overhead shot of Princess Azula's ship beside a beach. It is night, and the full moon hangs overhead. The beach is filled with tents and is populated with people from Azula's royal procession. Cut to a long shot of Azula sitting within her litter which rests atop the dais on the deck on her ship. She is flanked on either side by her crone teachers. Below them on the deck, a row of Fire Nation soldiers lie prostrate on either side of the ship.)

Crone Teacher #1: (from o.c. at first) When tracking your brother and uncle, traveling with a royal procession may no longer be an option.
Crone Teacher #2: May no longer be wise...if you hope to keep the element of surprise.
Azula: You're right. The royal procession is dead weight. If I want to catch my prey, I must be agile....nimble. I need a small, elite team. It's time to visit some old friends.

(Cut to a shot from somewhere in Omashu. The camera pans down to show the kids looking around and moving ahead while trying to escape detection. The hide behind some construction material as a patrol passes.)

Katara: Let's find Bumi and get out of here.
Sokka: Where would they be keeping him?
Aang: Somewhere he can't earthbend. (looking up and around, cut to Aang's p.o.v. as he pans around) Somewhere made of metal.

(Cut to a close up of a young woman with a large quantity of well coifed black hair. Her expression is emotionless, her eyes golden or light brown. Behind her walk two Fire Nation guards.)

Mai: There really is no fathoming the depths of my hatred for this place.

(Cut to a wider shot to show Mai walking next to an older woman carrying a baby. They are being escorted by Fire Nation guards down a tunnel or passage.)

Governor's Wife: Mai, your father was appointed governor. We're like royalty here. Be happy, and enjoy it.

(Cut to a long, overhead shot from higher up in the city as Mai's party exits the fortress passage and emerges out into the open. It is still night and the torches of Mai's party can clearly beseen below. In the foreground is the beginning of one of Omashu's famous chutes which ends near where the party is walking below. The camera zooms back to show an overhead view of an Earth Kingdom resistance fighter who looks down at the torches, then back to someone off screen. In front of him are some rocks or other objects ready to be dropped down the chute.)

Resistance Fighter #1: The targets are approaching.

(Cut to a close up an earthbender's bearded face, his eyes obscured by his helmet.)

Resistance Leader: Take them out.

(Cut back to Mai and her party walking below.)

Mai: (distressed, but in a dull tone) I thought my life was boring in the Fire Nation. But this place is unbearably bleak. Nothing ever happens.

(Cut back to the resistance fighter above. He launches the rocks into the tube which go crashing down at high speed. Cut to Aang who looks in horror at the falling debris, then over at the party of people passing to his left who will soon be crushed by the falling objects. Shift to a side view of Aang, Katara and Sokka behind him. Aang stands just next to the bottom of the chute as the rocks enter the frame from above. Mai and her party are slightly below him on the plaza itself. The Avatar raises his staff and pulverizes the rocks into pebbles and dust as it passes with a blast of air. Cut to a wide, overhead shot from across the plaza, clearly showing Mai's party, the kids, and the huge cloud of dust from the foiled assassination attempt. A few moments of silence pass as Mai looks at Aang and Aang looks back at her and the rest of her party. Cut to a wide shot of Mai's group looking up out of the frame at Aang.)

Governor's Wife: (pointing at Aang) The resistance!

(Cut to Mai, who smiles slightly and in an instant fans out her arms, releasing a hail of small arrows. Cut to Aang, who dodges the arrows which embed themselves on the stack of construction material he is standing on, then to a wider shot as Aang, Katara and Sokka run out of the frame to the right, pursued by Fire Nation soldiers who climb up a couple ladders from the plaza below. Katara turns and using the water from water skin she whips them off the ledge and onto the plaza below.

Cut to a stylized shot of Mai running at Katara, her arms spread to either side. A close of up shot of Mai's hand appears a split second later. She fires another hail of from some unknown mechanism around her hand and forearm. Her nails are long and black. Cut to Katara, who creates a wall of ice in front her, stopping the arrows. Mai continues the pursuit as Katara flees. Aang lets Katara pass as he turns to face Mai. As his assailant approaches, Aang causes some construction scaffolding on his right to collapse between them. As the scaffolding collapses, Mai is able to get one, ornate throwing star through the falling debris. Aang twirls his staff in front of him and stops it just in time. The dust from the falling scaffolding clears, once again giving Mai a clear shot. She throws another hail of arrows, but the kids disappear through a large trap door which closes instantly above them. Cut back to Mai, who sighs amidst the wreckage, turns, and walks away.

Cut to a tunnel scene which the kids have just fallen into. Green sewage drips from the ceiling. Pan down to reveal the kids sitting on the floor of the tunnel where they fell from above. Aang and Sokka rub their heads. Cut to a shot of the bearded Earth Kingdom soldier who gave the order to go ahead with the failed attack.

Cut to an upside down shot of some grass. The camera pans up to reveal an upside down frame showing some red and pink circus tents with mountains in the background. A few people are working on finishing tent set up and rolling barrels around. Azula, also upside down, walks into the frame and addresses the camera.)

Azula: Ty Lee, could that possibly be you?

(Cut to a right side up shot of someone performing a head stand on their index fingers. The camera pans up to reveal a pretty, bright eyed girl with a long black pony tail, dressed in pink and red. She smiles widely.)

Ty Lee: Azula!

(Cut to a wider shot from near Azula's p.o.v. Ty Lee breaks her head stand with a couple graceful moves. She prostrates herself on the ground, then runs and gives Azula a bear hug. Azula smiles and returns the hug.)

Ty Lee: It is so good to see you!
Azula: (smiling) Please, don't let me interrupt your... (raises an eyebrow, searching for the right word and failing) whatever it is you were doing.

(Ty Lee, still smiling, flips over backwards and ends up lying on her chest, with one of her feet arched over in front of her head, the other pointing straight up into the air. In the background, three circus people try unsuccessfully to coax a platypus bear dressed in red vest and wearing a fez to move.)

Azula: Tell me, what is the daughter of a nobleman doing here? Certainly our parents didn't send us to the Royal Fire Academy for Girls to end up in... (cut to a shot of the efforts with the platypus bear, Azula continues, with a slight note of contempt in her voice) places like this.

(The platypus bears groan and then gets up with a slight popping noise to reveal that it has laid an egg.)

Azula: I have a proposition for you. I'm hunting a traitor. (Looking at her wrist a bit absent mindedly) You remember my old fuddy duddy uncle, don't you?
Ty Lee: (still resting on her chest and elbows, but now with both feet planted on her head) Oh yeah. He was so funny.
Azula: I would be honored if you would join me on my mission.
Ty Lee: Oh...I...uh...would love to. (Springs back to her feet in a single, fluid motion) But the truth is, I'm really happy here. (Smiling serenely) I mean, my aura has never been pinker!
Azula: I'll take your word for it. Well, I wouldn't want you to give up the life you love just to please me.
Ty Lee: (bowing slightly and clasping her hands in a gesture of thanks) Thank you, Azula.

(Azula walks away as Ty Lee turns and with a smile raises her leg to her head in an impressive stretch. Azula turns to address her once more.)

Azula: Of course, before I leave, I'm going to catch your show.

(An expression of panic spreads over Ty Lee's face, which faces away from Azula, and she loses her grip on her leg. She recovers and grips her leg once more, a sad and worried expression on her face.)

Ty Lee: Uh...yeah...sure...uh...of course...

(Azula walks away in the background.

Cut to an underground cavern under Omashu. It is filled with Earth Kingdom resistance fighters. The kids and the Resistance Leader stand on the ledge in front of the main exit tunnel from the room, which is lit by several lamps hanging from the walls.)

Aang: So, is King Bumi with you guys? Is he leading the resistance?

(Cut to a close shot of the resistance leader.)

Resistance Leader: (With quiet intensity) Of course not! The day of the invasion, we readied ourselves for battle. We were prepared to defend our city...to fight for our lives and for our freedom. But before we even had a chance, King Bumi surrendered.

(Cut to a zooming in shot of Aang, clearly disconcerted at this news. Katara looks at Aang in concern. Cut to black for commercial break.)



Act II

(Return to another shot of the underground cavern filled with resistance fighters. Cut to a shot of the kids standing in front of the Resistance Leader, their backs to the camera.)

Resistance Leader: The day of the invasion, I asked King Bumi what he wanted to do.

(Cut to a zooming in close up of the Resistance Leader)

Resistance Leader: He looked me in the eye and said...

(The screen flashes white and the audience enters a flashback from the Resistance Leader's memory. King Bumi stands atop one of the city walls, the Resistance Leader next to him. They look in front of them off screen. Fireballs arch into the city overhead. Cut to a profile shot of Bumi's head.)

King Bumi: I'm going to do... (he turns to face the camera) nothing!

(At this Bumi begins to laugh and snort maniacally. In the background, the carnival music often heard when Bumi was onscreen in "The King of Omashu" returns again here. The flashback ends and is replaced by a close up of the Resistance Leader.)

Resistance Leader: It doesn't matter now. Fighting the Fire Nation is the only path to freedom. And freedom is worth dying for.
Aang: Actually there's another path to freedom. You could leave Omashu. You're directing all your energy to fight the Fire Nation. (Cut to a panning shot of the resistance fighters around them, all clearly listening to Aang, the camera ultimately resting back on the Resistance Leader.) But you're outnumbered. You can't win. Now's the time to retreat, so you can live to fight another day.
Resistance Leader: You don't understand. They've taken our home, and (making forceful hand motions for added emphasis) we have to fight them at ANY cost!
Resistance Fighter #1: I don't know, (unintelligible word that sounds like "Ya" and might be the Resistance Leader's name), living to fight another day is startin' to sound pretty good to me.
Resistance Fighter #2: (stepped forward from behind Resistance Fighter #1) Yeah, I'm with the kid!

(Cut to a close up of the Resistance Leader who looks down into the cavern where the other fighters and displaced citizens of Omashu whisper their agreement.)

Resistance Leader: (turning back to the kids) Fine. But there's thousands of citizens that need to leave. How're we going to get them all out?

(Cut to Sokka, stroking his chin, thinking. He comes up with an idea.)

Sokka: Suckers!

(Cut to a shot from Sokka's p.o.v., the rest of the group staring at him. Momo chitters questioningly. Cut back to Sokka whose eyes dart back and forth to a sound effect.)

Sokka: You're all about to come down with a nasty case of pentapox.

(Camera pans down at high speed indicating a scene change. A bucket of water and about a dozen pentapi appear. A hand reaches in and grabs one, which squeaks. Cut to some resistance fighters, now above ground somewhere in the city, applying pentapi to their exposed skin. The pentapi undulate a bit and leave their red marks when removed. After some time, Sokka addresses a crowd of sick looking citizens and resistance fighters.)

Sokka: The marks make ya look sick, but you gotta ACT sick, too. Ya gotta sell it!

(An old man walks between Sokka and the crowd, groaning pathetically and holding a hand to his allegedly aching back.)

Sokka: (putting his arm around an earth kingdom citizen next to him) Now that's what I'm talkin' about.

(Cut to a shot of the old man looking back at Sokka. He taps his wooden leg with his cane and smiles.)

Old Man: Years of practice.

(Cut to a profile shot of Sokka, Aang and Katara behind him, pointing toward the city and raising his voice to address the crowd.)

Sokka: Okay everyone! Into sick formation.

(The citizens and Sokka walk left out of the frame. Katara moves to join, but turns as Aang heads in a different direction. Momo chitters excitedly.)

Katara: Aang, what are you doing? Aren't you coming with us.
Aang: (turning to face her) No. I'm not leaving until I find Bumi.

(Momo jumps onto Aang shoulder and chitters. He grabs Aang's mouth, but Aang picks him up and drops him on the floor.)

Aang: Sorry Momo, I'll feed you later.

(Aang airbends himself to the surrounding rooftops and bounds away.

Cut to a shot of the sun in the sky. The screen pans down in a flash to some Fire Nation soldiers. Zombie like noises are heard from o.c., before a cut to an approaching crowd of "sick" Omashu citizens. Soon it is clear that several mobs of people are approaching the soldiers, all moaning, some even falling over, "dead". Cut to a close up of Sokka, Katara visible over his shoulder, both covered in red splotches and moaning, then cut back to the Fire Nation soldiers who are now terrified.)

Soldier: Plague! Plague!

(The soldier turn and run back to the citadel behind them. Cut to a view from above where a Fire Nation soldier is banging an alarm. Below, the moaning citizens advance as the guards run away.

Cut to a panoramic shot of the city from the one of the balconies of the Governor's mansion. The Governor, his wife and their baby son, Mai and some guards enter the screen from the bottom of the frame. Cut to a frontal shot of them as they look out over the city.)

Governor: What is going on down there?
Guard: I saw some kids yesterday who were sick with pentapox. It must have spread!
Governor: Pentapox! I'm pretty sure I've heard of that.
Governor's Wife: Oh, this is terrible.
Guard: What should we do?
Governor: Drive them out of the city...but don't touch them! We have to rid the city of this disease!

(The guard bows and leaves. Mai offers her father the bowl she is carrying.)

Mai: Fire flakes, Dad?

(Cut to a shot from behind. The Governor's wife hugs her husband.)

Governor's Wife: (gasping) How awful!

(The baby toddles away from the group and out of the frame. Cut to Aang airbending himself through the city. From a rooftop he spies Flopsie, chained to a millstone. On his hind legs, Flopsie pushes the turnstile that drives the mill. He is alone while performing this backbreaking work. Aang jumps down.)

Aang: Flopsie!

(Aang stands with his hands outstretched to receive a hug, but Flopsie is restrained by his chain. He makes unhappy noises. Aang jumps onto the turnstile, waterbends some water from a nearby cistern and freezes it around the chain where it is connected to the turnstile. Aang then breaks the chain with his staff. Flopsie lunges forward, scoops Aang up in a hug and licks him.)

Aang: (climbing on top of Flopsie) Come on, Flopsie. You gotta help me find Bumi. Yip Yip! Oh...I guess that doesn't work with you. Let's go!

(Flopsie and Aang take off at high speed into the streets of Omashu.

Cut to Momo flying through the air and landing in the Governor's palace. He enters through a window into the Governor's baby son's room. Cut to Momo's p.o.v., where he sees a little teddy bear bouncing up and down over the top of a set of art or dressing panels near the back of the room, which is filled with toys. The sound of a baby playing is heard.

Momo spies a platter of berries on a nearby table and jumps over to it. He begins to eat the berries and spitting the seeds over the art panels. Cut to the baby who stops throwing the teddy bear around when he notices the seeds falling around him. He crawls around the panel and underneath the table Momo is sitting on. The child is captivated by the flying lemur's tail, which hangs over the side of the table. The child reaches up, grabs Momo's tail and pulls him to the ground in mid bite.

Dragging the child behind him, Momo tries to escape. The child lets go and Momo runs out onto the railing of the balcony. He turns to see the child, still laughing and smiling, has followed him. He lunges for Momo, but misses. Momo flies off, but the child falls down the tiles of the roof beneath them and lands in a box of berries traveling down one of Omashu's many chutes.

Momo lands on the box of berries and begins eating again, only to have the child emerge from the berries behind him. Momo looks over in some horror at the child, who grabs his tail before he can react. The lemur jumps into the air, beating his wings frantically trying to get away. Finally, the box drops off beneath them as it drops down another chute. Momo gets the airborne, but can't bear the weight for long. Soon, they are both dragging on the floor of a nearby plaza. The child lands on top of Momo, who is pinned to the floor.

Suddenly, a host of moaning Omashu citizens begins to pass by them. Momo gets up and runs after the citizens and the baby follows Momo out of the city's main gate.

Cut to a night shot of a brightly lit circus tent, which cuts quickly to a shot of some performers in two Chinese style dragon costumes. The dragons jump out of the frame to reveal the Circus Master addressing the crowd. Behind him is the circus' main ring.)

Circus Master: We're deeply honored to have the Fire Lord's daughter at our humble circus.

(Cut to a shot from behind the Circus Master. Azula and two guards reside in a box seat high above him, richly decorated in Fire Nation livery. The rest of the circus looks empty.)

Circus Master: Uh...tell us if there is anything we can do to make the show more enjoyable.
Azula: I will.

(Cut to wide, long shot of the main circus ring. A net is stretched across it. Pan up to show Ty Lee wearing colorful clothing and a golden tiara like head piece doing a head stand using one hand holding a short stick. This stick in turn is balanced on top of what looks like the frame of a small tent. Incredibly, this tent frame, in its turn, balances on a high wire. Cut back to the Circus Master and Azula.)

Azula: Incredible. Do you think she'll fall?
Circus Master: Of course not.
Azula: Then wouldn't it make it more interesting if you removed the net?
Circus Master: (concerned) Uh...the thing is...the performers...
Azula: You're right, you're right. That's been done. (After a short pause) I know. Set the net on fire.
Circus Master: Of course, Princess.

(He stands and shoots a gout of flame at the net which promptly catches fire. Cut to a close up shot of Ty Lee's face, the fire from the net reflecting on her face as she still remains balanced on the high wire. Sweat pours down her unhappy face. Cut back to Azula and the Circus Master, who looks up tensely towards Ty Lee off screen, his fists balled in frustration.)

Azula: Brilliant, just brilliant! (She looks back down at the Circus Master) Oooo, what kind of dangerous animals do you have?
Circus Master: Well, our circus boasts the most exotic assortment...
Azula: (cutting him off) Release them all!

(Cut back to a zoom in shot of Ty Lee's terrified, sweaty face, then cut to an exterior shot of the tent as the sound of wild animals erupts from within. The camera pans up to a shot of the full moon before cutting to shot panning down on the newly formed camp of Omashu citizens somewhere outside the city.

Cut to Aang and Flopsie walking towards the camp, Flopsie making vaguely tired grunts. Sokka and Katara get up from a nearby fire and come over to him.)

Aang: (sadly) We looked everywhere. No Bumi.

(Katara hugs Aang. Flopsie makes sad noises, and Sokka hugs him. The Resistance Leader walks up behind them.)

Resistance Leader: We've got a problem. We just did a head count.
Katara: Oh no. Did someone get left behind?
Resistance Leader: No, (pointing o.c. to the right) we have an extra.

(Cut to Momo walking to the left of the frame, a terrified expression on his face due to the baby attached to him around his neck. The baby is laughing as he hugs the befuddled lemur. Momo drags off the left side of the frame. Cut back to the kids and the Resistance Leader watching Momo drag the baby around.

Scene shift to an exterior shot of the Governor's palace, the cut to Governor's wife seated in a chair on the balcony, sobbing. Mai stands next to her and offers her a handkerchief.)

Governor: So, the resistance has kidnapped my son. (exasperated) Everything so clever, so tricky. Just like their King Bumi.
Guard: (from behind) What do you want to do, sir?

(The Governor turns from him and looks back out over the city and the full moon above it.

Cut to a shot of a bouquet of what look like dead roses dropped unceremoniously on a table, then cut to a wider shot of Azula standing behind Ty Lee who is seated at her dressing table. The roses had been dumped on her dressing table.)

Azula: What an exquisite performance. I can't wait to see how you'll top yourself tomorrow.

(Cut to a closer shot of Ty Lee looking at Azula's reflection in her mirror, smiling.)

Ty Lee: I'm sorry Azula, but unfortunately there won't be a show tomorrow.
Azula: Really?
Ty Lee: (hanging up her tiara) The universe has given me strong hints that it's time for a career change. I want to join you on your mission.

(Cut to a profile shot of the two as Ty Lee turns to face Azula, then cut to a close up of Azula who looks satisfied at having gotten her way again.

Cut back to the camp of Omashu citizens, then to a quick shot of Aang and the others around a campfire. Cut again to the baby wandering around after Momo and making cute noises. They arrive at Katara and Sokka, his water tribe club lying on the ground. The baby picks up the club and starts to suck on it. The screen expands as Sokka grabs it and holds it away.)

Sokka: No! Bad Fire Nation baby!

(The baby begins to cry. Katara looks over at her brother crossly, whacks him across the face and places her hands on her hips.)

Sokka: Oh...alright.

(The baby stops crying and begins to play with the club.)

Katara: (leaning over to hug the baby from behind) Ooo, you're so CUTE. Mmmmm...

(Cut to the Resistance Leader sitting on the other side of the camp fire.)

Resistance Leader: Sure he's cute now, but when he's older, (cut back to Sokka and Katara, still hugging the baby, he continues from o.c.) he'll join the Fire Nation army. You won't think he's so cute then. He'll be a killer.
Katara: (picking the baby up, who still clearly wants to play with the club) Does that look like the face of a killer to you?

(Cut to a brief shot of the Resistance Leader's grave face before cutting to a messenger hawk screaming across the moonlit night. Cut to the p.o.v. from a nearby rock that overseas the camp. The hawk lands on the rock.)

Resistance Leader: A messenger hawk!

(Fade to Aang unrolling the message brought by the hawk.)

Aang: It's from the Fire Nation governor. He thinks we kidnapped his son. So...he wants to make a trade. His son (the camera rotates around Aang for additional effect) for King Bumi.

(Cut to black for commercial break.)



Act III

(The show returns to a shot of a partly cloudy sky. The camera pans down to reveal Aang looking out over an expanse of mountains, his back to the camera. After a moment's pause, Aang walks down the hill and out of the frame. Cut to a profile shot of Aang, carrying the baby in his arms, walking down the hill towards Sokka, Katara and Momo below him.)

Sokka: You realize we're probably walking right into a trap?
Aang: I don't think so. I'm sure the Governor wants his son back as much as we want Bumi. It's a new day. (Cut to a wide, overhead shot of the group and the sun and mountains behind them) I have a good feeling about this.

(Cut to a shot of several Fire Nation guards carrying Azula's litter on their shoulder through one of Omashu's plazas. Cut to a profile view of Azula sitting in her litter. Cut to a short, pan right still of Mai standing at the foot of a large, white staircase, then cut to an overhead shot of the guards lowering the litter to the ground in front of Mai. Azula gets out walks over to Mai, joined quickly by Ty Lee.)

Mai: (bowing, speaking in a dull voice) Please tell me you're here to kill me.

(Cut to a close up of Mai, who looks up slightly and smiles. Cut back to a wider shot of the three as Mai and Azula begin to laugh.)

Azula: (hugging Mai) It's great to see you, Mai.

(Ty Lee runs over and hugs Mai.)

Mai: (somewhat surprised) I thought you ran off and joined the circus? You said it was your calling.
Ty Lee: (releasing Mai and smiling widely) Well, Azula called a little louder.
Azula: I have a mission (she puts one of her hands on each of their shoulders) and I need you both.
Mai: Count me in. Anything to get me out of this place.

(Cut to a shot of the Fire Nation flag which quickly pans down to reveal Azula sitting in the Governor's chair, flanked by guards. In front of her stand the Governor, his wife, and Azula's friends.)

Governor: I apologize.

(Cut to a closer shot of the Governor kneeling on a red pillow, looking up at Azula off screen in trepidation, his hands held out before him in a pleading gesture.)

Governor: You've come to Omashu at a difficult time. At noon we're making a trade with the resistance to get Tom-Tom back.
Azula: Yes, I'm so sorry to hear about your son, (she crosses her legs in front of her) but really, what did you expect by just letting all the citizens leave? (She stands, suddenly angry, and looks down upon him) My father has trusted you with this city (she makes a slashing gesture with her left hand) and you're making a mess of things!
Governor: (prostrating himself) Forgive me, Princess.

(Azula walks between the Governor and her two friends. Cut to a view from the Governor's p.o.v., Azula looking down at him.)

Azula: You stay here. (Mai and Ty Lee stand up behind her) Mai will handle the hostage trade so you don't have a chance to mess it up. (Cut to several exterior shots of the still smoking city and several construction projects within, continue Azula voice over) And there is no more "Omashu". I'm renaming it in honor of my father, the City of New Ozai.

(Cut to a long, overhead shot of Aang, still wearing his hat, Katara and Sokka at the bottom of the scaffolding of a huge statue that is under construction, then cut to close shot of them that pans slowly left. Each of them looks ahead with defiance. Sokka holds the baby.

Cut to their p.o.v. as Mai, Azula and Ty Lee mount the platform. Mai leads the group. Cut to a wide overhead shot from somewhere near the top of the statue under construction. The two groups face each other at opposite ends of the construction platform. The scene is filled with tension. Cut to the stop of the scaffolding where a crane is lowering a metal coffin suspended by a chain. Inside, the laughing and snorting King Bumi can be heard. Sure enough, the coffin twists on the chain to reveal Bumi's face, visible through a porthole just large enough for his face.)

King Bumi: Hi, everybody!

(The coffin lands standing straight up behind Mai and her friends.)

Mai: You brought my brother?
Aang: He's here. We're ready to trade.
Azula: (to Mai, Bumi grinning behind them all) I'm sorry, but a thought just occurred to me. Do you mind?
Mai: (turning to Azula) Of course not, Princess Azula.
Azula: We're trading a two year old for a king. (She turns to Bumi) A powerful, earthbending king.
King Bumi: (smiles, closes his eyes, and nods at her) Mmm hmmm!
Azula: (turning back to Mai) It just doesn't seem like a fair trade, does it?

(Mai looks away from Azula and o.c. towards her brother in Sokka's arms. Cut to a shot from behind Aang and Sokka, the baby cooing over Sokka's shoulder, then cut back to Mai who begins to walk forward.)

Mai: You're right. (To Aang) The deal's off.

(She raises her left hand and Bumi is lifted back off the ground as the chain is reeled in from above.)

King Bumi: (enjoying himself) Whhhoa! See you all later!

(Cut to Bumi's p.o.v. to show Aang, Sokka and Katara receding below as he is hauled up. Bumi continues to laugh and snort from o.c.)

Aang: Bumi!

(Cut to a shot from behind Aang as he rushes forwards towards Mai, Azula and Ty Lee. As he approaches, the shot cuts to a profile view of Azula on the left of the frame. She bends a plume of whitish blue fire at knee level towards Aang, who enters the frame from the right and jumps high into the air to avoid it. He lands and part of the partially constructed building and jumps off again. He opens his glider in mid air, but loses his hat, exposing his tattoo. He grabs the hat with his mouth before it flies away, but it is too late, Azula has recognized him.)

Azula: (in surprise) The Avatar! (Cut to a quick shot of Aang spiraling upwards with his glider, then back to Azula, who looks smug) My lucky day.

(Azula runs over to the elevator winch and releases the break with a blast of blue fire. The winch begins to spin rapidly as Azula grabs one of the chains attached to the mechanism. The winch raises her rapidly toward the top of the construction scaffolding.

Cut to Aang landing atop Bumi's coffin as it continues its ascent.)

King Bumi: Aang, is that you? Where did you come from?
Aang: Hang on! We're gonna get you out of here.

(The Avatar takes a deep breath and begins to blow on the chain connecting the coffin to the crane, slowly freezing it.

Cut to Mai and Ty Lee charging Katara and Sokka. Several blades extend from Mai's right hand during a very short close up that is followed by a shot of Katara and Sokka behind her watching the charge. Katara is in a waterbending stance while Sokka blows on the bison whistle in the background.)

Katara: We've got to get the baby out of here!
Sokka: (stopping his whistling to answer, a smile on his face) Way ahead of ya!

(The baby grabs the whistle, then cut to an overhead shot of Katara and Sokka running to the edge of the construction platform. Suddenly, a fist punches Sokka's foot as he passes from a hole in the floor. Sokka goes sprawling to the edge of the platform, but lands on his back, protecting the baby.

Cut to a shot behind Katara. She looks down the platform to Sokka and sees Ty Lee vault out of a trap door in the floor and head towards Sokka and the baby. She creates a water whip and prepares to strike Ty Lee, but turns just in time to use the whip to raise up some wood from the floor to block the blades that Mai has just thrown at her. The blades bury themselves in the wooden planks. Katara then uses the whip to throw the wood at Mai, then turns and catches Ty Lee's ankle with it. Ty Lee falls flat on the ground as Sokka climbs down a ladder with the baby. In the background, Katara whips Mai away once again. Cut back to Sokka sliding down the ladder and running off below with the baby.

Cut back to Bumi and Aang still being raised with the coffin and Aang still blowing on the chain.)

King Bumi: Aang, stop your blowing for a minute.

(The chain is now encased in ice where it meets the coffin. In the background, an explosion of dust announces the arrival of Princess Azula. Cut to a wide shot of the coffin and the top of the construction scaffolding to which it is now adjacent. Azula jumps high into the air after having been carried up at high speed by the mechanical energy of the winch below. The frame rate slows as she reaches the height of her arc. The frame rate speeds up again as she unleashes a blast of blue fire from her foot at Aang. Cut to a wide shot of Aang on top of the coffin as the blast comes toward him. He partially deflects it with his staff, but the chain holding the coffin breaks.)

King Bumi: Now hold on just a (the chain breaks and they fall) duahhh!!!

(Cut to a shot from near Azula's head as she watches the coffin fall. Cut to Aang atop the falling coffin. As they are about to hit one of Omashu's chutes, he creates a huge airball that deflects their fall. They land in the chute and begin to ride down it.

Cut to Azula, watching from a perch high above. She scowls, jumps into a nearby box, which falls into a nearby chute. Cut back to Aang surfing atop Bumi's coffin as it rockets down the chute.)

Aang: (smiling and laughing) Just like old times, isn't it, Bumi?
King Bumi: Aang, I need to talk to you!
Aang: (not understanding because of the noise) It's good to see you too!

(Aang looks up to see Azula riding a box in a chute just above them. He begins to twirl his staff rapidly to dissipate the blue fire bolts rapid fired at them by the Princess. Their chutes merge and Azula is now behind them. Aang launches a gale at her, but she parts it with her hands steepled in front of her. She follows, launching more fire blasts at him. Finally, they enter a portion of the chute that has arches over it at short intervals. Aang blasts these with wind and they come tumbling down on the chute between Azula and them. Cut to a profile of Azula riding atop the box. She and the box disappear as they enter the dust cloud of the fallen arches. The box emerges from the other side without Azula. Cut to Aang who breathes a sigh of relief, but he screams as she stands up from where she had been crouched in the box. She launches another blue blast of fire, but Aang ducks and avoids it.

Cut back to a wide, overhead shot of Katara facing Mai on the construction platform. Katara whips Mai, but misses as Mai leans back to avoid the water. As she leans back, Mai launches another blade from her a device around her ankle, but Katara blocks it with a wall of ice. Cut to Mai charging Katara, her arms sweeping back behind her in a herring bone formation. As she approaches, Katara encases Mai's arm in water and freezes it. Mai tries to break the ice with her free arm, but fails.

Ty Lee jumps up onto the platform and bounds toward Katara. She systematically jabs various pressure points on Katara apparently causing her whip to fall to the ground, useless, and the ice around Mai's arm to melt. Ty Lee jumps over to stand by Mai. Startled, Katara recovers and assumes another stance. She tries to raise the water from the platform, but very little happens. Cut to a frontal shot of Mai and Ty Lee, both waiting for Katara to do something.)

Mai: (taunting) How are you gonna fight without your bending?

(Mai pulls out another blade from her robe, this one a three pointed device that unfolds into a talon shaped throwing star. Katara gasps as Mia gets ready to throw. As she does, Sokka's boomerang enters the frame from behind Mai and knocks the star out of her hand.

Cut to Sokka atop Appa, who catches his boomerang.)

Sokka: I seem to manage!

(Sokka and Appa land between Katara and her would be killers. Appa's tail comes down is huge arc, smashing the platform in behind him, throwing Mai and Ty Lee way back and making a huge hole in the floor.

Cut to Sokka and Katara now atop flying atop Appa. Katara looks to her left and points.)

Katara: There's Aang!
Sokka: We can catch him!

(Cut to a shot behind Katara and Sokka, the chute where Aang and Azula are battling clearly visible below.

Cut back to Azula throwing blasts of blue fire ahead of her. Aang deflects them with his staff as Appa and the others pull up alongside.)

Aang: Hang on, Bumi! Our ride's here!

(Aang strikes the side of the chute with his staff, launching the coffin out of the chute. Katara and Sokka try to grab the coffin as it passes overhead, but they miss. The coffin sails over Appa and falls down the other side. Bumi screams on the way down. Cut to a wide shot as they land crosswise on another chute and break right through it. They fall through to another chute, this time landing lengthwise and they begin to slide down once more.

Azula continues to pursue them in her box. She creates a circular saw blade of blue fire and launches it at the coffin. As it approaches, Bumi strains in his bonds and causes a pillar of earth to rise up through the chute just in time to absorb the blast. Azula jumps out of her box just as it impacts on the pillar of earth. She slides to a halt in the chute, looking displeased, then cut to her p.o.v. as she watches Aang and Bumi slide away, then back to a close up of her displeased expression.

Meanwhile, Bumi's coffin begins to plane out as it reaches the bottom of the chute.)

Aang: You could earthbend all along!?
King Bumi: Well, they didn't cover my face.

(Bumi strains again within his bonds, then cut to a shot of the end of the chute. An outcropping of rock appears. The coffin hits it as it exits the chute and ends up standing straight up on the newly raised rock. Aang now looks up at Bumi in his coffin.)

Aang: I don't understand. (Getting angry, the questions becoming rapid fire) Why didn't you free yourself? Why did you surrender when Omashu was invaded? What's the matter with you, Bumi!?
King Bumi: Listen to me, Aang. There are options in fighting, called jin. It's a choice of how you direct your energy.
Aang: I know! (holding up his fingers as he counts them off) There's positive jin when you're attacking, and negative jin when you're retreating.
King Bumi: And neutral jin (the camera zooms to a close up of Bumi's face) when you do nothing!
Aang: (startled, looking at his hand which now has three fingers raised) There are three jins?
King Bumi: Well, technically there are eighty five. But, let's just focus on the third. Neutral jin is the key to earthbending. It involves listening and waiting for the right moment to strike.
Aang: (with dawning understanding) That's why you surrendered, isn't it?
King Bumi: Yes, and it's why I can't leave now.

(Aang looks down and turns away, clearly sad and disappointed, Bumi in the background.)

Aang: I guess I need to find someone else to teach me earthbending.
King Bumi: Your teacher will be someone who has mastered neutral jin. You need to find someone who waits and listens before striking.

(Momo jumps onto Aang shoulder and chitters.)

Aang: Hey, Momo!
King Bumi: Momo's mastered a few jins himself!

(Cut to a close up of Momo, who looks at Bumi and screams, then cut to Bumi.)

King Bumi: Goodbye, Aang. I'll see you when the time is right.

(Bumi leans back and his coffin tumbles back into the chute. Laughing maniacally, Bumi uses his earthbending powers to drive his coffin back up the chute.

Cut to a shot of Aang from the p.o.v. of the now empty chute. Behind him, Appa and the others appear.

Cut again to a shot of Azula's litter driving out of the city. Shift to a closer shot of Azula sitting in her litter, partially obscured by the litters veil, her friends walking at beside her.)

Mai: So, we're tracking down your brother and Uncle, huh?

Ty Lee: (teasing) It'll be interesting seeing Zuko again, won't it, Mai?

(Mai turns sideways, looks at the camera, and smiles for a brief second before looking ahead again.)

Azula: It's not just Zuko and Iroh anymore. We have a third target now.

(Fade to Aang peeping over a balcony, then cut to the Governor holding his wife on the patio below where Aang is hiding. It is night, or just past dusk. Cut to a shot behind the Governor. Aang glides silently down from above and releases the baby, who toddles over to his parents. Aang departs as silently as he came. The baby is greeted with joy.)

Governor's Wife: (gasping) Tom-Tom!

(Aang watches from the roof with a smile, then flies away. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(The show opens with an overhead shot of a rice paddy. It is daytime and the sun shines. The shot pans down to reveal an Earth Kingdom village. Cut to a shot of a bridge over one of the nearby streams. People bearing backpacks and other loads walk back and forth over the bridge, either entering or departing the village.

Cut again to a street scene within the village. The background is obscured for a second by an out of focus person walking in front of the camera. He exits to reveal Iroh and Zuko sitting on straw mats, their stolen ostrich horse behind them. Iroh holds his hat in his hand. A cart festooned with masks for sale passes briefly in front of them. One of the masks is the Blue Spirit mask. As the cart passes, another pedestrian walks in front of Iroh. Iroh holds his hat out to the pedestrian and speaks to him.)

Iroh: Spare coins for weary travelers?

(The man throws a few copper coins into Iroh's hat, joining perhaps a dozen already there. Cut to a profile shot of the two as Zuko turns to Iroh in anger.)

Zuko: This is humiliating! We're royalty. These people should be giving us whatever we want.
Iroh: They will - if you ask nicely.

(Cut briefly to a long shot as several more pedestrians pass. Iroh next solicits a well dressed young woman.)

Iroh: (in a weak voice) Spare change for a hungry old man?
Young Woman: Aww, (she produces a coin from her sleeve and puts it in his hat) here you go.
Iroh: The coin is appreciated, but not as much as your smile.

(Zuko slaps his forehead in a Sokka-like gesture of frustration. The girl giggles and walks away. A man carrying a pair of broadswords on his back wanders by the opposite direction as the girl. He stops and addresses the beggars.)

Broadsword Man: (smiling somewhat cruelly) How about some entertainment in exchange for... (cut to a frontal shot of Zuko sitting in a petulant pose. Suddenly the Broadsword Man's hand appears in the foreground holding a gold coin) a gold piece.
Zuko: We're not performers.

(Cut to a wider shot from behind the Broadsword Man's right shoulder. Iroh smiles and puts his hat on the ground.)

Iroh: Not professional, anyway.

(Standing up and clasping his hands together, he begins to sing)

Iroh: (singing, and shifting from one foot to another as he rocks back and forth) It's a long, long way to Ba-Sing-Se, (his mouth becomes very wide in an animation effect) but the girls in the city they look soo prett-ay!
Broadsword Man: (displeased) Come on! We're talking (he whips out one of his broadswords) a gold piece here! (He whips out the other) Let's see some action!

(Cut to a close up of Zuko's face. His eyes burn with anger. Cut to a wider profile shot of Iroh and the Broadsword Man.)

Broadsword Man: (pointing a sword at Iroh) Dance!

(The Broadsword Man begin to swing his swords at Iroh's legs. Iroh hops up and down to avoid the blows while continuing his song.)

Iroh: (singing) And they kiss so sweet that you've really got to meet the girls from Ba-Sing-Se!

(Cut to Zuko, gritting his teeth and gripping his knees in his hands. Cut back to a frontal shot of the sadistic almsgiver.)

Broadsword Man: Hahaha! Nothing like a fat man dancing for his dinner. (Tosses coin) Here ya go!

(Cut to a wider profile shot. Iroh leans down and picks up the coin as the Broadsword Man walks away, reseathing his swords. Cut back to Iroh and Zuko. Iroh sits back down as both look towards their benefactor's retreating back o.c.)

Iroh: (smiling) Such a kind man!

(The camera zooms in on Zuko's angry and humiliated expression before flashing white.

When the image returns we see an overhead shot of a swampy area. Appa flies onto the screen and begins pulling away from the camera, the kids on his back.

Cut to Momo peeping over the saddle guard and chittering, then cut to a profile shot of Katara reading a scroll and looking vaguely bored. Pan left to reveal Sokka sharpening his machete, also looking bored. Cut again to Aang in the driver's seat. He looks ahead, a vacant, almost mesmerized expression on his face. He holds the reigns loosely in his hands. Cut back and forth between Aang expression and the swamp below. Some sort of communication is happening, but its exact nature is unclear. Cut to Sokka, who looks over Appa's side.)

Sokka: (to Aang, o.c.) Hey, you takin' us down for a reason?

(Cut to an underside shot of Appa, who is indeed descending. Appa emits a low groan. Cut back to Aang, still zoned out.)

Sokka: (from o.c.) Aang! (Aang flinches and the camera zooms backward to a wide shot of Aang and Sokka, now visible behind him in the saddle) Why are we going down?
Aang: What? (Wiping his forehead with his left hand) I didn't even notice.

(Cut to long, profile shot of Appa et al. They are descending at a steady rate.)

Sokka: Are you noticing now?
Katara: (coming up from behind) Is something wrong?
Aang: (looking down at the swamp with a slightly fierce expression) I know this is gonna sound weird, but... I think the swamp is... calling to me.
Sokka: (holding his stomach) It is telling ya where we can get something to eat?
Aang: No, I... I think it wants us to land there.
Sokka: No offense to the swamp, but I don't see any land there to land on.
Aang: I don't know... Bumi said to learn earthbending I would have to wait and listen, and now I'm actually hearing the earth. Do you want me to ignore it?

(Appa continues to descend. Katara, Sokka and Momo peer over the saddle to look as they get closer to the swamp.)

Sokka: Yes!
Katara: I don't know... There's something ominous about that place.

(Momo chitters and exits the frame. Cut to a shot of Appa's head as he groans.)

Sokka: See Even Appa and Momo don't like it here.
Aang: Okay, since everyone feels so strongly about this... bye swamp.

(Cut to a wide shot of them flying on Appa. Aang shakes the reigns.)

Aang: Yip! Yip!

(Appa groans and flies out of the frame as he accelerates. Cut to a departure angle shot as Appa speeds away. As Appa and the gang recede, however, a huge noise is heard from o.c. A moment later a large tornado enters the frame from the rate. It moves at terrifying speed in pursuit of the kids, tearing up the swamp as it goes.

Cut to a view of the saddle from behind Katara and Sokka's back. Sokka turns around. His eyes bulge as he sees what is pursuing them.)

Sokka: You better throw in an extra "yip"! We gotta move!

(Appa tries desperately to evade the tornado. Aang manipulates the reigns furiously. The tornado is right on top of them, however, and they are unable to distance themselves. As the whirlwind bears down on them, Sokka is blown off the saddle. Katara catches his arm and holds onto him. As Sokka screams, Aang jumps out of the driver's seat and onto the saddle. He instantly creates an air bubble around them and Appa, just as they are sucked into the tornado. Sokka falls back into the saddle as Aang struggles to keep out the whirlwind. He fails as one of Appa's toes begins to stick out of Aang's protective air blister. Aang's barrier collapses and they are engulfed in the tornado, which throws them out in all different directions.

Cut to a shot outside the tornado. Appa is ejected deep into the swamp, knocking down much in his path as witnessed by the dust and dirt cloud that erupts over the swamp canopy. Cut to a shot inside the swamp as Katara and Sokka drop from the sky into the muddy water. It is dark in here, even though it is still daytime. The swamp canopy screens out most of the sunlight. A second later Aang drops into the frame using his airbending to cushion his fall. Cut to a shot of a Sokka shaped shadow in the water. Sokka gets up, rubbing his head and making pained sounds. The three get up and look about them.)

Aang: Where's Appa and Momo?

(Aang airbends himself through the trees and emerges at the top of the tree canopy. He scans around, but sees nothing.)

Aang: (calling fruitlessly) Appa! Momo!

(Cut back to an overhead shot of Sokka and Katara walking through the swamp. Cut to a shot of a crocodile like monster sits in the water some distance away, then cut back to Katara who points at Sokka.)

Katara: Sokka! You've got an elbow leech!
Sokka: (freaking out) Where! Where!

(After he stops moving, it is clear the leech is hanging from his elbow. Katara crosses her arms and looks coolly at her brother.)

Katara: Where do you think?
Sokka: (angrily ripping off the leech and throwing it near Katara) Why do things keep attaching to me!

(Katara looks angrily at her brother for a moment before cut to a wide shot of Aang swinging on a vine back towards them.)

Katara: You couldn't find them?
Aang: No... and the tornado... it just disappeared.

(Cut to a frontal shot of Katara and Sokka, who turn around to look behind them into the dark depths of the swamp. The camera zooms in on the blackness, then fades to a shot of Appa hanging from the swamp canopy by a net of vines. Appa strains to free himself, but the vines hold him immobilized. Momo chitters and begins to chew threw vine after vine. Finally, Appa's weight is too much for the remaining vines and they fall to into the muddy water below.

Appa shakes as much water off him as he can, then takes off again. He flies right into another net of vines and is once again held fast. Appa groans in frustration again, as Momo begins the process once more.

Cut to a shot of some vines and weeds. A machete cuts through them to reveal Sokka and the others behind him.)

Sokka: We better speed things up!
Aang: (concerned) Maybe... we should be a little nicer to the swamp.
Sokka: (continuing to chop through the vines) Aang, these are just plants! Do you want me to say "please" and "thank you" as I swing my machete back and forth?
Katara: (also concerned) Maybe you should listen to Aang. (Cut to an overhead shot of the dark swamp) Something about this place feels... alive.

(Cut back to a closer shot of Sokka addressing Katara.)

Sokka: (slightly annoyed and gesturing with his machete) I'm sure there are lots of things that are alive here, and if we don't wanna wind up getting eaten by them, we need to find Appa as fast as we can.

(Sokka begins cutting a path with his machete once again. Cut to the p.o.v. of someone looking at the kids through the vines some distance away.

Cut to Appa making footprints in the swamp floor. Momo sits atop his saddle as Appa plods on. A frontal shot of Appa reveals a large fallen tree in their way. Appa groans in frustration, then cut to a wider overhead shot. Appa collapses in a heap, refusing to move any farther, then cut to Momo blowing the bison whistle in the saddle. Appa cringes and tries to cover his ears. Appa groans, but Momo bows it again. Cut to a wider shot as Appa swats Momo in the saddle using the flat of his tail like a fly-swatter. Momo chitters and falls backwards, clearly knocked silly.

Fade to a long shot of the kids walking through the swamp. They are walking up a large fallen tree, the water beneath them. It is hard to tell, but it looks like night has fallen.)

Katara: (calling out) Appa! Momo!

Sokka: There's no way they can hear us and no way we can see them. We'll have to make camp for the night.

(Sokka is suddenly surrounded by about a dozen swamp flies which he flails at with his arms and machete. They go away just as a huge bubble of swamp gas burps from the muddy water beneath them. The gas rises up to them.)

Katara: What was that!
Sokka: Nothing. Just swamp gas. (The gas begins to swirl about them) Look, there's nothing supernatural going on here.
All: (As the gas reaches there noses) Ugh!

(Their disgust in interrupted by a terrifying scream. The stop in mid retch and grab each other with bugged out eyes. The camera zooms backward to reveal a white bird in the foreground with a huge mouth. This is the source of the scream. It screams once more and flies off. Cut back to the terrified kids still gripping each other.)

Sokka: I think we should build a fire...

(Sokka runs over to some nearby tree or vine roots and starts hacking them with his machete. Aang and Katara enter the frame from the left, their backs to the camera.)

Aang: Sokka, the longer we're here the more I think you shouldn't be doing that.
Sokka: (slightly sarcastically) No, I asked the swamp. It said this was fine. (He turns to address a nearby root) Right, swamp? (he grabs the root and begins to shake as he fakes a reply in a funny voice) "No problem, Sokka!"

(He then chops the top of the root off with his machete. Cut to a frontal shot of Aang, displeased and Katara disconcerted.

Switch to a long shot of the kids on a ledge created by the root system of a large tree. They have built their camp on it and sit around a small fire. It is sometime later that night.

Cut to Katara looking around out of the camp. She turns back to address the others, a slightly creeped out look on her face.)

Katara: Does anyone else get the feeling that we're being watched?

(The camera pans right across Aang to stop on Sokka, who responds in annoyed tone. A few flies continue to buzz around him, but not the others.)

Sokka: Please, we're all alone out here.

(He starts swatting at the fly with his machete and misses. Cut to a wider shot of the group as the fly turns into a ball of incandescent light. They shield their eyes from the light, then cut to a closer profile view of the three kids. Behind them in the swamp, many glowing eyes look down up them. The three turn their heads to look at the sinister eyes.)

Aang: ...except for them.

(They turn back to the camera with frightened faces and the eyes disappear behind them. They grab each other in a group hug.)

Sokka: (terrified) Right, except for them.

(Fade to a view of the swamp. It is still night. The screen pans up to show Appa lying down on the lowest branch of a huge tree. Cut to a closer shot of Appa, Momo perched atop him. The sounds of the swamp are all around them, and Momo scurries around, listening, and frightened at the cacophony. Cut to a close up of Appa, who opens an eye, lift his head and roars. The swamp falls silent. Momo curls up on Appa and tries to sleep.

Cut to a shot of the kids' fire. It is dying. The camera zooms back to reveal the three, backs to each other, fast asleep.

Shift again to the p.o.v. of the stalker from earlier in the story. Through a bunch of vines the stalker observes the kids from afar. Cut to a vine snaking its way across the ground. The camera pans up to reveal its target - Sokka - whose left leg sticks out. The vine winds around it and then around his whole body. Cut to black for commercial break.)



Act II

(The show returns to an overhead shot of the three, each tied up by three or four vines that snake out of the frame. Cut to a close up profile shot of the three. For a moment they are still asleep, but awake screaming as the vines simultaneously yank them all out off the screen and away from each other.

Cut to Sokka. He plants his machete in the ground as he is dragged away, halting his movement. Both Katara and Aang are dragged off into the mist. Sokka gets up and starts hacking the vines with his machete. He frees himself and runs back down the tree root, pursued by more vines.

Cut to Katara, struggling to free herself from the vines. Using a water whip she cuts through her bonds and runs off into the mist.

Cut to Aang, who frees himself by creating an air bubble around him and expanding it. His bonds loosened, he collapses the bubble and hops into the surrounding trees, closely pursued by more vines. He escapes a vine that pulls him to the ground using his airbending to propel himself far away and soon finds himself alone in the swamp. Cut to a wide shot of Aang looking around for his friends.)

Aang: Guys?

(Fade to a shot of Appa's footprint, filled with swamp water. Cut to two barely clothed figures who are looking down at the footprint. Due is tall and skinny, and Tho is short and fat. Both wear small, animal skin loincloths. Each has a single, large leaf on his head that serves as a hat. It is once again hard to tell, but it seems to be daytime. Tho carries a stick.)

Due: What'd you reckon make a track like that, Tho?
Tho: Don't know, Due. (Points stick at footprint) Something with six legs. (Cut to footprint as Tho's stick enters frame from o.c.) Pretty big'uns too.

(The camera pans up to reveal Appa's tracks in the mud.)

Due: Leaves a nice, wide trail to folla'.
Tho: You know what's at the end of that trail?

(Due shakes his head in the negative. Cut to a close up of Tho's smiling face.)

Tho: Dinner.

(Cut to Appa swimming in the marsh water, then cut to a close up of Momo. His eyes dart from side to side as he chitters. A fly is buzzing around his head. It flies off and Momo flies after it. He lands on a nearby tree root, still trying to trap the fly. He hops from root to root. He catches the fly on the last root, but releases it when the root turns out to be the back of a catfish crocodile. Momo jumps into the air as the creature roars and snaps its mighty jaws at Momo. The monster pursues Momo as he flies back to Appa. The camera pans left as the chase continues. When they reach Appa, the bison's mouth is open to receive the pursuing crocodile. Appa spits him back out. Momo and the monster hiss at each other for a moment, then the crocodile swims off. Cut back to Appa, who shakes his head slightly and groans.

Cut to another swamp view. The camera pans down to reveal Katara walking through an area where the tree roots are covered in white flowers.)

Katara: (calling out) Aang? (Cut to a closer shot) Sokka?

(Cut to Katara's p.o.v. Ahead of her is another water tribe woman, back to the camera. She wears the same robe as Katara and has the same hair style. Katara begins walking toward the figure.)

Katara: Hello? Hello? Can you help me? (She squints, then cut to again to water tribe woman's back) Mom? (More loudly and running towards the figure) Mom!

(Cut to a profile shot of Katara as she runs, her eyes streaming tears of joy. She reaches the figure and places a hand on her shoulder.)

Katara: I can't believe...

(The smile drops from her face as the scene begins to lighten. Cut to a wider shot. Katara stands in front of a tree stump. The figure was an illusion. Katara gasps at the realization, then falls to her knees and begins to cry. Cut to an overhead shot of the devastated water tribe girl, then fade to shot of Sokka's hand holding his machete high. The rest of Sokka appears.)

Sokka: Aang! (He is cutting a path in the vines before him with his weapon) Stupid swamp! Dumb, ugly vines! Katara! (Turning to another vine in his way) You think you're so tough, huh?

(He swings, misses, gets caught up in some vines, and falls flat on his face in the mind. He looks up and sees a ghostly figure hovering some distance away from him. Floating in a shaft of light, it is the spirit form of Princess Yue.)

Sokka: Hello? (Sokka walks forward) Yue? (Sokka grabs the side of his head and looks away) This is just a trick of the light... swamp gas... (he turns around, his back to the ghost) I... hit my head running away last night. I'm going crazy.

(He turns around, still frightened. He walks over to her.)

Princess Yue: (her voice sounds as if from far away, echoing) You didn't protect me.

(Sokka rubs his eyes and suddenly the shaft of light is empty. He turns to walk away and Yue is behind him. He yells and falls backwards into the water. He looks around once more, and she's gone. He stands, draws his machete, and walks off, a frown on his face.

Fade to an overhead shot of Aang walking through the swamp.)

Aang: (calling out) Katara! Appa!

(Cut to a shot from behind Aang's back. Above him on a stone or earthen mound are two figures in white.)

Aang: Hello?

(Cut to a closer shot of the two. The one on the left is a pig with wings. The one on the right is a girl in a white robe.)

Aang: (from o.c.) Who are you?

(The girl covers her mouth with her hands and laughs. The pig flaps its wings and raises itself into the air. The pig flies off and the girl runs down the opposite side of the mound. Cut back to Aang.)

Aang: Hey, come back!

(Aang pursues the girl through the swamp through several shots. She seems to be many places at once, able to move at lightning speed, or both. Aang cannot reach her.

Fade to a shot of a chicken possum hanging from a tree branch, then pan down to Appa swimming down one of the swamp's many rivers.

In front of Appa the mist clears to reveal three river boats. The point boat is manned by Tho and Due. The two parties survey each other. Momo chitters atop Appa. Sitting in the driver's seat, it looks as if Momo is Appa's master. Cut to a close up of Tho, who licks his tongue over his thick lower lip. Momo chitters again, then cut back to Tho and Due.)

Due: Look at that, Tho. Is that little hairy fellow ridin' that thing?
Tho: Naw, that's what they call a "lemoo," saw one at a travelin' show once. Real smart they say.
Due: Bet he tastes a lot like possum chicken.
Tho: You think everything tastes like possum chicken.
Due: (leaning forward and talking to Appa and Momo) C'mon now, fellas. Just a little closer. Nice and easy. Nothing to worry about. We just fixin' to eat ya.

(Appa roars, turns and bounds away. Cut back to Due and Tho, the waves from Appa's wake buffeted them.)

Tho: (angry) What'd ya say that fer?
Due: Well, we are!
Tho: But you don't have to tell'em that!
Due: (confused) Well how'd I know they'd understand me!
Tho: (exasperated, but wanting to stop arguing and get after Appa and Momo) Come on!

(Due stands up and begins making paddling motions with his hands. Within a few seconds the boat speeds off, with Due waterbending to propel the canoe. The other boats follow, a waterbender in each of those as well.

Cut to Appa running over the surface of the river, his feet splashing as he goes. The boats follow close behind.

Shift back to Aang still in pursuit of the laughing girl. After a few more shots, he spies her on top of another mound.)

Aang: Who are you?

(He runs up the mound and charges her. She turns, but it is not the girl in white, it is Katara. Cut back to Aang, who realizes too late that it is Katara. He runs right into her and knocks her off the mound. She cries out as they go down. Cut to Sokka walking along, then drawing his sword as he hears something approach. The other two appear rolling into the frame and knock him down as well. The land in a pile at the bottom of another tree root. Sokka gets up, angry.)

Sokka: What do you guys think you're doing! I've been looking all over for you!
Katara: (displeased with Sokka's attitude) Well, I've been wandering around looking for you!
Aang: (airbending himself to his feet) I was chasing some girl.
Katara: What girl?
Aang: (helping Katara to her feet) I don't know. I heard laughing and I saw some girl in a fancy dress.
Sokka: (sarcastically) Well, there must be a tea party here and we just didn't get our invitations!
Katara: (after a pause and looking down) I thought I saw Mom.
Sokka: (again after a pause and looking down) Look, we were all just scared and hungry and our minds were playing tricks on us. That's why we all saw things out here.
Katara: You saw something too?
Sokka: (turning away) I thought I saw Yue. But, that doesn't prove anything. (Turning back to the others) Look, I think about her all the time, and you saw Mom, someone you miss a lot.
Aang: What about me? I didn't know the girl I saw. And all our visions led us right here.

(Aang begins scanning around as if looking for something.)

Katara: Okay... so where's here? (Gesturing in front of them) The middle of the swamp?
Aang: Yeh, the center...

(As Aang speaks, cut to a wide shot of the swamp that zooms backwards to reveal that they are standing at the base of the largest tree imaginable.)

Aang: (from o.c.) It's the heart of the swamp, (cut back to Aang, the others behind him) it's been calling us here, (smiles) I knew it.
Sokka: (frustrated) It's just a tree. It can't call anyone! For the last time, there's nothing after us (cut to a wide shot of the three standing on the tree root, Aang on the left, Sokka on the right, Katara in the middle) and there's nothing magical happening here.

(At that moment a huge swamp monster, seemingly made of vines bursts from the water behind the log. Cut to a close up of the three hugging each other and screaming their heads off. An animated effect appears behind them to accentuate the terror. Cut to black for commercial break.)



Act III

(The show returns to an overhead shot of the three standing on the tree root looking up in terror at the camera. Cut to a close up of the monster which has a very simple, carved wooden mask on its face. The camera zooms back as the vine monster swings at Aang. The three break up and run out of the frame in different directions.

The monster grabs Sokka as he runs away and begins flailing him around. Aang turns and knocks Sokka out of the monster's grip with a blast of air. Sokka falls into the water with a yell. The monster then knocks Aang way back with a sweep of its arm. Cut back to Sokka cutting vines around him with his machete. To his right, the vines start rising out of the water. The camera pans up to reveal the vines attaching itself to the monster and rebuilding the right arm that Aang had damaged with his blast of air when he released Sokka. The monster swings at Sokka and grabs him again.

Cut to Katara who skates across the water in a graceful curve and fires a jet of water through the creatures left shoulder. The creature drops Sokka, a large hole in its left shoulder. Katara squares off against the creature as it fills the hole with more vines. Cut to a close shot of Katara who looks on in alarm. Katara skirts around the monster as it swings a few times and misses. She sprays some water at it and then concentrates, building a large wave and washing the creature backwards. Sokka screams, as he is once again in the monster's clutches.

Katara then parts the water between her and the monster. She runs down the dry earth in front of her, but the creature knocks her backward with vines that grow right out from its body.

Cut to Aang running back to the fight. Katara sails the other way in the background, yelling as she goes. Aang turns back just in time to get smacked backwards by another vine appendage. Cut back to the monster which has Sokka in its grip. It places Sokka on its and begins to suck him in. Sokka struggles, but is slowly drawn in.

Switch to a long shot of Appa running through the swamp, pursued by the waterbender boats. Cut to a close up of Tho and then Due, still performing his waterbending moves. He is hit in the face by something and is disoriented momentarily. Cut to Momo, who is atop Appa and looking for things to throw at their pursuers. Cut back to a profile shot of Tho, one of the other boats in the background. A blue shirt whaps one of the other boatmen in the background in the face. He struggles to get it off.)

Tho: Now what would a lemoo need a shirt fer?

(The other boat with the blinded crewman capsizes. Cut back to Appa running over the swamp surface. Appa bends low and runs under a tree root or fallen tree that blocks his path. Appa makes it, but knocks Momo off his back. Cut to Tho, ready to catch Momo with an open sack. Momo flies right into it, Tho closes the sack, ties it and drops it beside him. The chase continues.

Cut to a swamp shot that pans down to reveal the monster flailing about, then cut to Sokka still struggling in the monster's chest. Shift to Aang approaching rapidly across the water, seated on an air ball. Aang rides the air ball up the monsters torso and back as the monster swings at him and misses. Aang lands atop its head and begins to make a whirlwind around the monster. The whirlwind twists the vines that compose the monster into a huge coil.

Switch to Katara who makes a few waterbending motions then blows a breath out that freezes the water vapor in front of her. Cut to a view from Katara's back. Her breath has frozen the vines around Sokka. She raises a column of water behind her that propels her and Sokka through the chest of the monster and into the water behind. The monster repairs the hole in its chest and begins to advance on the pair.

Cut to Aang jumping through the air and landing on the monster's back. Aang jumps back onto the ground and the monster blasts him out of the frame again. Aang goes flying through the air and lands back in the water.

Katara turns back to the monster, an expression of determination on her face. The camera zooms back as she begins to rapid fire loops of water at the monster as it approaches. Cut to a profile shot of Katara and the monster. The loops get larger the farther they get from Katara. As they strike the monster, the sound of a cutting knife is heard. A few close ups show the water slicing the vines apart. One of the close ups reveals that there is a man inside the monster dressed like Due and Tho. Katara continues to rapid fire and the monster begins to disintegrate, revealing a few more glimpses of the man inside. Cut to Sokka.)

Sokka: There's someone in there! He's bending the vines!

(Cut back to Katara who twirls around in a bending move and slices the mask and the head of the monster with a mighty lash of the water whip. The head and mask fall into the water as a bunch of vines grab Katara. Sokka watches as Aang flies back into the picture and with a single blast of air blows away the rest of the monster to reveal a fat, leaf clad man.)

Aang: (angry) Why did you call me here if you just wanted to kill us?
Hue: (dropping the rest of the vines around him) Wait! I didn't call you here.
Aang: We were flying over and I heard something calling to me, telling me to land.
Sokka: He's the Avatar. Stuff like that happens to us - a lot.
Hue: The Avatar! Come with me.

(The kids drop their combat stances and then fade to a view of the swamp from above the canopy. It is daylight. The kids and Hue are climbing the exposed roots of the great tree at the center of the swamp.)

Katara: So, who are you then?

(Cut to a closer view of the group. Hue bends a vine out of their way.)

Hue: I protect the swamp from folks that want to hurt it. (He lets Aang and Katara pass, and then to Sokka as he in turn passes) Like this fellow with his big knife.
Sokka: (to his friends) See? Completely reasonable. Not a monster (he sheathes his machete as he follows Aang and Katara who have now exited the frame), just a regular guy defending his home. Nothing mystical about it.

(Cut again to the wider shot of them ascending the tree root.)

Hue: (voice over) Oh, the swamp is a mystical place, all right. It's sacred.

(Cut to a shot of a space between the roots of the tree at its base. The group enters the frame.)

Hue: I reached enlightenment right here under the banion grove tree. (He sits) I hear it callin' me, just like you did.
Sokka: Sure ya did. It seems real chatty.
Hue: See, this whole swamp is actually just one tree spread out over miles...

(The camera zooms out and fades to show several shots of the tree, finally ending with a shot of tree and the whole swamp.)

Hue: Branches spread and sink and take root and then spread some more - one big living organism, just like the entire world.

(Cut back to Hue's p.o.v. looking at the kids.)

Aang: I get how the tree is one big thing, but, the whole world?
Hue: (cut to Hue's face) Sure. You think you're any different from me? Or your friends? Or this tree? (The camera cuts to different shots of the swamp as Hue speaks) If you listen hard enough you can hear every living thing breathing together, you can feel everything growing. We're all livin' together, even if most folks don't act like it. We all have the same roots, and we are all branches of the same tree.

(Camera pans up form the last shot to show a long shot of the group sitting on the tree root.)

Katara: But what did our visions mean?
Hue: In the swamp we see visions of people we've lost, people we loved...

(The screen flashes white as we enter a flashback. The flashback pans right to show the spirit of Yue, and the back of Sokka and Katara's mom.)

Hue: (continuing from voice over) ...folks we think are gone. But the swamp tells us they're not.

(The screen flashes white and the flashback ends. When the screen returns, Hue is seated where he was and continues to speak.)

Hue: We're still connected to'em. Time is an illusion, and so is death.
Aang: But what about my vision It was someone I had never met.
Hue: (smiling) You're the Avatar. You tell me.

(Cut to a profile shot of Aang, who tries to puzzle this out.)

Aang: (to himself) Time is an illusion... so, it's... (looks up at Hue, realization spreading across his face) someone I will meet?

(Cut back to Hue, smiling, who winks at Aang to a subtle sound effect. Then cut to a wider shot of the group. Sokka stands up and addresses the group)

Sokka: Sorry to interrupt the lesson, but we still need to Appa and Momo.
Aang: I think I know how to find them. (Aang leans forward and places his hand on the tree root. He closes his eyes and begins to concentrate.) Everything is connected.

(The arrow tattoo on Aang's hand begins to glow. Lighting or some other energy suddenly surges from his hand and into the tree root. The energy follows a zigzag path down the tree root and then through the swamp. The screen flashes to show Aang's head superimposed on vines rushing by in the background.

The screen flashes white, and then a fish eye view of Appa getting netted by the boatmen appears. Appa roars and struggles, but is clearly on his way to being subdued. The flashback ends and Aang stands up.)

Aang: Come on! We've got to hurry!

(Cut to a hand strumming the side of a boat.)

Tho: (singing) Set my lines by the river bed! (Cut to a wider shot of Tho, Momo struggling in the bag in front of him, Appa caught in a net being towed behind him.) Caught ten fish and I killed'em dead! (Cut to a wider shot of the two boats slowing being waterbended forward.) Cut'em and gut'em and I tossed the heads in the water to keep them cat gators dead.

(Suddenly a jet of water erupts beyond the boats and destroys the one farther one that does not contain Due and Tho. Cut to an overhead shot of the captured Appa from the p.o.v. of a tree branch. Aang appears on the tree branch.)

Aang: Appa!

(Aang unleashes a blast of air that knocks Tho off the boat. He drops the bag with Momo as he flies off and Momo gets out and flies away.)

Due: We're under attack!

(Due waterbends a wall of water up at Aang and Katara, who has joined Aang on the tree branch, which they bend away from them. Cut to Katara, who bends back and forth as she manipulates the water.)

Katara: Hey, you guys are waterbenders!

(Cut to Due.)

Due: (smiling) You too? That means we're kin!

(Cut back to Katara, who looks vaguely horrified. Cut to a wider shot as the water wall collapses between them. Sokka and Hue run up the tree branch to Aang and Katara. They look down, then cut to Due.)

Due: (Putting his hands on his hips and smiling) Hey, Hue! How you been?
Hue: (smiling sheepishly) You know, scared some folks, swung some vines, the usual.

(The camera pans to the kids looking with various expressions of surprise over at Hue.)

Sokka: Hue?

(Cut to an overhead long shot of a campfire with the kids and the swamp men around it. Appa is with them, freed. Cut to a closer shot. They are eating meat off shish-kabobs.)

Due: How you like that possum chicken?

(Cut to a shot from between Hue and Tho, looking at Katara and Sokka across the campfire. A catfish crocodile sits just behind Hue and Tho in the foreground.)

Sokka: (examining his kabob) Tastes just like arctic hen. (Looking up at them) So why were you guys so interested in eating Appa? (Points at the catfish crocodile) You've got plenty of those big things wandering around.
Due: (incredulously) You want me to eat old Slim? He's like a member of the family!

(Due takes a fish off his kabob and tosses it at Slim, who eats it in one bite.)

Sokka: Nice Slim!

(Sokka throws a piece of roasted insect at Slim, but it bounces off his mouth. Slim turns and growls at Sokka, who recoils in terror.)

Due: (laughing) Oh, he don't eat no bugs! That's people food.
Tho: Where d'you say you're from?
Katara: The South Pole.
Tho: Didn't know there was waterbenders anywhere but here. They got a nice swamp there, do they?
Katara: No, it' all ice and snow.

(Tho and Due look surprised.)

Tho: Hmm. No wonder you left.
Sokka: (To his sister in a slightly sanctimonious tone) Well, I hope you realize now that nothing strange was going on here. Just a bunch of greasy people living in a swamp.
Katara: What about the visions?
Sokka: I told you, we were hungry. I'm eating a giant bug!

(Sokka lifts up what appears to be a huge fruit fly, fully the size of a grown cat, and takes a huge bite out of it and swallows. The camera pans over to Aang, seated in front of Appa with Momo in his lap. Hue is seated next to him, eating.)

Aang: But what about when the tree showed me where Appa and Momo were?
Sokka: That's Avatar stuff, that doesn't count. (To Hue) The only thing I can't figure out is how you made that tornado that sucked us down.
Hue: I can't do anything like that. I just bender the water in the plants.
Sokka: (trying to sweep the issue under the carpet) Well, no accounting for weather. Still, there's absolutely nothing mysterious about the swamp.

(Cut to a long shot of the camp from across some open water. A tree branch is in the foreground. One of the screaming white birds lands on the branch and screams. A nearby vine rises up and bats the bird into the camera, which goes dark.

When the image returns, it is of a full moon back in the Earth Kingdom village where we last saw Iroh and Zuko. The camera pans down to reveal the Broadsword Man walking down a street alone. He hears something behind him, turns and draws his blades. Cut to a frontal shot of him, there was nothing behind him.)

Broadsword Man: Who's there?

(Cut to a close up shot of his hands, which are grabbed each in turn by another man's hands. He is disarmed and thrown against some nearby boxes, his swords useless on the ground. His assailant's feet are seen to approach the sword. He picks them up, as the camera in turn pans upward to reveal that the assailant is no less than the Blue Spirit himself. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Episode opens with an early morning scene that begins with a wide shot of a shoreline. The shore is largely composed of cliffs that drop shear into the sea. The tops of the cliffs in the foreground are forested, those in the background are grass covered. The shot tilts down to reveal Appa, Katara and Sokka asleep. The water tribe siblings each sleep atop a large tree stump.

Cut to a view from inside Sokka's mouth. Sokka breathes heavily with his mouth wide open. A spider has built a web in his open mouth and sits patiently at its center. A moment later, Momo's face appears. His ears stand straight up on his head and he chitters as he sees the spider. He blinks. Shift to a quick profile view of Momo standing up on his hind legs, beginning to lean forward toward Sokka, who is drooling out of the side of his mouth. Cut to Momo's p.o.v.; the camera closes in on the web as a fly enters the frame and lands on the web. The spider moves to get the fly.

Cut back to the profile shot of Momo and Sokka, where Momo cocks back his hand, and the shoves it into Sokka's mouth. Sokka's eyes bug out. Cut to a shot from Sokka's chest looking forward. Sokka lifts his head, chucking Momo over his face and at the camera. He disappears from the frame, leaving an irate Sokka.)

Sokka: (spitting and startled) What are you doing in my mouth!

(Cut to a profile shot of Sokka, Momo eating the bugs, lying upside down on his chest.)

Sokka: Momo, you need to be a little more sensitive to my boundaries.

(As Sokka speaks, Momo hears something that isn't Sokka. He flips upright, chitters and jumps on Sokka's face and then out of the frame. Cut to a brief wide shot of the camp, then a shot of Aang sleeping on Appa. A galloping sounds is heard from o.c. as Aang awakes. He looks off screen in horror. The camera pans right at very high speed creating a rushing effect. It stops on a patch of open ground nearby. A Fire Nation war rhinoceros jumps into the screen and lands with a ponderous "thud." Atop the beast a Fire Nation soldier rides. Cut to Katara, halfway out of her sleeping bag. She gasps, then cut to another rhino emerging from the brush. Cut to a muscular, cruel looking soldier atop one of the rhinos. He wears a nose ring and a short sleeve uniform.)

Colonel Mongke: Give up! You're completely surrounded!

(As he speaks, cut to a wide, overhead shot of the camp. The camera zooms back at high speed to reveal four rhinos circling Appa and the kids. Cut to a shot of a long haired Fire Nation archer with three flaming arrows on his bow. He fires them. Cut to Sokka, still in his sleeping bag, moving in earthworm type fashion. The three arrows pin the end of the sleeping bag to ground. Sokka frees himself and runs out of the frame. Cut to a shot from above Aang who sits in Appa's drivers seat. In front of him, Sokka and Katara run into the frame towards Appa.)

Sokka: Come on, come on, come on!

(Cut to a frontal shot of Katara running towards the camera. Her eyes widen and she stops. She turns to look at the tree stump behind her as a rhino passes by in the background.)

Katara: My scrolls!

(The rhino stops at the stump and its rider twirls a halberd and then plants it into the stump. Cut to Aang, who leans forward with a look of alarm on his face, as Sokka crawls up onto Appa in the background.)

Aang: My staff!

(His face twisting in anger, Aang jumps airbends himself off Appa and out of the frame.

Cut to a frontal shot of a determined Katara running at the camera as it zooms backwards, keeping her in the frame. She opens her water skin as she runs and bends a jet of water o.c. Cut to a shot of the tree stump. The water enters the frame and hardens to ice around the soldier's halberd. Tilt up to reveal the surprised Fire Nation soldier, then cut a shot from the soldier's p.o.v. looking down as Katara scoops up the box of scrolls on the stump and runs out of the frame. Cut to a wider shot as Katara runs o.c. with the box hugged to her chest. In the background, the soldier breaks the ice and retrieves his weapon.

Cut to a shot from the top of a tree trunk high off the ground. A Fire Nation cavalryman at the bottom launches a chain with weights at its end up to the camera. The chain, anchored by the weights, wraps around the tree trunk. Cut to a shot from near the cavalryman, who directs his rhino to move away from the tree. The chain goes taught and the tree is brought down with a huge crash.

Shift to Aang running to his staff. The tree falls in his way, but he airbends lightly over it. Cut to a masked Fire Nation soldier for a second, then to a close up of his hand and belt. He snaps his fingers, removing a cap from a dynamite like stick, one of many, on his belt. Removing the cap seemingly lights a wick. He throws the device. Cut to Aang arriving at his staff as the bomb drops into the frame next to him. He sees it, and with a grimace and twirl of his staff his bats it deeper into the forest. He airbends out of the frame and it explodes in the background.

Cut to a wide shot of Appa surrounded by the four rhinos once more. In the foreground on a rock, close to the camera's p.o.v, Colonel Mongke's rhino sits looking down at the battle. Aang lands atop Appa.)

Aang: Yip, yip!

(With a flap of his tail, Appa takes off. Cut to Colonel Mongke, who fires a blast of flame at Appa's retreating figure. Cut to Katara, Sokka and Momo in Appa's saddle. They duck as the fireball passes overhead.)

Sokka and Katara: Ahhh!
Sokka: Wait, my boomerang!

(Cut to a spinning, zooming backward shot of Sokka's boomerang still on the ground below.)

Katara: There's no time!
Sokka: Oh, I see. There's time to get your scrolls and time to get your staff, but no time for my boomerang?
Katara: (cheerfully) That's correct!
Sokka: (resigned) Oh.

(Cut to a shot from near Colonel Mongke's shoulder. He looks out over the scene below and Appa flying away in the distance. He turns and looks off camera with an angry expression.

Screen fades to a pan right shot of a daytime scene. A walled town lies nearby. A trail leads to it out of the forest on the right of the screen. On the other side the town abuts a cliff that looks over the ocean. In the foreground, Appa has landed in a forest clearing near the trail that leads to town. A small building is also nearby.)

Aang: (initially from o.c.) Sorry about your boomerang, Sokka.

(As Aang speaks, cut to the kids inside the town. Katara is talking to a vendor in a stall behind Aang and Sokka, who is sitting on the ground, mourning the loss of his boomerang. Aang wear's a coolie hat to hide his tattoo.)

Sokka: I feel like I've lost part of my identity. Imagine if you lost your arrow, or if Katara lost her... (cut to Katara, looking confused) ... hair loopies.

(Sokka walks over to the stall, where Katara hugs him. The merchant puts a basket of food on the counter.)

Merchant: Here's your produce, ponytail guy.
Sokka: (picks up basket, then, dejected) I used to be boomerang guy...

(Katara pays the nice merchant.)

Merchant: (surprised) Hey, Water Tribe money.
Katara: I hope that's okay.
Merchant: So long as it's money. (closes shop and begins to walk away) Have a nice Avatar Day!
Aang: Avatar Day?
Merchant: (turning around) You guys are going to the festival, right?

(Aang, Katara and Sokka look at each other. Sokka, who has been crying over his boomerang still looks distraught, but Katara and Aang smile.

Cut to a wide, overhead shot of the sky. Tilt down to reveal the walled town. Festival music plays in the background. Cut to a shot of the three kids in a crowd on a street. Green banners fly suspended on strings across the streets. They look around in wonder, Sokka carrying Momo in his arms.)

Aang: There's a holiday for the Avatar. Who knew?

(Behind them a hug float of Avatar Kyoshi rolls by. They turn to see it.)

Katara: Look! They made a giant Kyoshi float.

(The kids run to the main square.)

Sokka: And here comes Avatar Roku.
Aang: Having a huge festival in your honor is great, but frankly, it's just nice to be appreciated.
Sokka: And it's nice to appreciate their deep-fried festival food.

(Sokka takes a huge chomp out of a cake he is holding.)

Katara: Aang, look!

(A huge Aang float passes next.)

Aang: (smiling) That's the biggest me I've ever seen.

(Cut to a profile shot of the three Avatars now abreast of each other in the main square. Pan right to reveal a muscular and scantily clad young man running into the square with a lit torch.)

Sokka: Now a torch; that's a nice prop. It's bright, dangerous... (inhales deeply)... smells manly. But I'm not sure I could carry it off.
Katara: Hey, what's that guy doing?

(The torch man jumps through the bottom of the Kyoshi statue and lights it on fire.)

Torch Man: Yaaaah!

(He lights Roku on fire as well.)

Crowd: (chanting in unison) Down with the Avatar! Down with the Avatar! Down with the Avatar!

(Cut to a zoom in shot of the kids. Sokka's mouth drops open in surprise and food starts falling out.

Shift scenes to another town that rests on top of a hill, then cut to a man and woman walking down a deserted street. He is carrying two baskets suspended by a pole across his back. A shadow passes in front of the camera, then the Blue Spirit appears in front of the couple, swords drawn. He cuts the baskets away from the terrified man, scoops them up and runs.

Cut again to a forest shot. A fly or other insect is snapped up by the lengthy tongue of a nearby tree chameleon. Shot tilts down to show the Blue Spirit climbing over a log with his baskets of loot. A green clad arm places the mask in the hollow a tree. Zuko looks out from around the tree, then cut to a shot of a cave.

Iroh sits cross legged within the cave. Zuko throws the baskets from o.c. which land in front of him.)

Iroh: Where did you get these?
Zuko: (walking away) What does it matter where they came from?
Iroh: (seriously) Hmm... (eats food and smiles as pink goo drips from his mouth) Mmmm!

(Return to a profile shot of the burning Avatar floats.)

Crowd: (chanting in unison) Down with the Avatar! Down with the Avatar!

(The Mayor gives the torch man a signal, who throws his torch at the Aang float. It lands on his right eye and begins to burn. Cut to a shot of Aang with a distraught face amidst the crowd, the cut to Katara running across the plaza. She jumps forward and waterbends the water from two nearby water caskets, putting out the burning floats.)

Spectator 1: (angrily) Hey! That party-pooper's ruining Avatar Day!

(Aang airbends himself to the left shoulder of his own float.)

Aang: That party-pooper's my friend!

(He takes off his hat and throws it o.c. An animation effect shows a blinding shine from his perfectly bare head.)

Mayor Tong: (surprised) It's the Avatar himself!
Spectator 1: (panicking) It's going to kill us with its awesome Avatar powers!
Aang: (calmly, raising his hand in a non-threatening way) No, I'm not, I...

(Guy runs around completely scared and hurls himself into the crowd.)

Majoy Tong: (snootily) I suggest you leave. You're not welcome here, Avatar.
Katara: Why not? Aang helps people.
Aang: It's true. (airbending himself down to where Katara and the Mayor stand) I'm on your side.
Mayor Tong: (accusingly) I find that hard to swallow considering what you did to us in your past life. It was Avatar Kyoshi; she murdered our glorious leader, Chin the Great.
Aang: You think that I... murdered someone...

(Cut to an old, hideous man.)

Old Man: (slurring) We used to be a great society before you killed our leader. (pointing to himself) Now look at us!
Aang: (cringing in revulsion) Huh!
Katara: (defensively) Aang would never do something like that. No Avatar would. (pointing an accusing finger at the crowd) And it's not fair for you all to question his honor!
Spectator: (to the crowd) Let's tell her what we think of the Avatar's "honor." (blows a raspberry and sticks his butt out at her.)

(Crowd voices its agreement noisily.)

Aang: (to everyone) Give me a chance to clear my name.
Mayor Tong: The only way to prove your innocence is to stand trial.
Aang: (confidently) I'll gladly stand trial.
Mayor Tong: You'll have to follow all our rules. That includes paying bail.

(Cut to a close up of Aang.)

Aang: No problem!

(As he finishes speaking, a stock closes around his neck. The camera zooms backwards to reveal Aang behind bars, heads and arms in a stock. Outside of his cell Katara has her face buried in his hands and Sokka leans sullenly against a wall, Momo beside him.)

Aang: How was I supposed to know they wouldn't take Water Tribe money?

(Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(Show returns a wide, overhead shot from the town looking out to sea. Tilt down to reveal that Aang's cell is in fact an open air courtyard with a grated observation window into the jail building where Sokka and Katara stand. Cut to a shot from behind the water tribe siblings looking at Aang as Sokka speaks.)

Sokka: So some people don't like you. Big deal! There's a whole nation of firebenders who hate you. Now let's bust you out of here.
Aang: I can't.
Sokka: (upbeat) Sure you can! A little... swish, swish, swish! Airbending slice! ... and we're on our way.

(Sight gag: he flashes to the back of the room and uses his arms to cut the air and then back to the front to shove his face in the camera for "Airbending slice!")

Katara: (disdainfully) I think what "Master Swish" is trying to say is that you're supposed to be out saving the world. You can't do that locked up in here.
Aang: I can't do that with people thinking I'm a murderer, either. I need you guys to help prove my innocence.
Sokka: How're we gonna do that? The crime happened over three hundred years ago.
Aang: (shrewdly) That's okay, Sokka. For some reason, I thought you were an expert detective.
Sokka: (self-importantly) Well, I guess I could be classified as such.
Katara: (playing along) Yeah! Back home he was famous for solving the mystery of the missing seal jerky.
Sokka: (bragging) Everyone wanted to blame it on a polar leopard, but I figured out that it was Old Man Jarco wearing polar leopard boots. See, a real eight hundred pound polar leopard would have left much deeper tracks. Okay, I guess I am pretty good.

(During Sokka's monologue, Katara's holds her hand to her head in a gesture of despair, while Aang makes gestures poking fun at him. Sokka fails to notice either.)

Aang: So you'll help me with my case?
Sokka: Fine. But I'm gonna need some new props.

(An effect of instantly passing time and space stops to reveal Sokka a strange hat.)

Sokka: I'm ready.

(He extends a magnifying glass out of hat that rests in from of his right eye. The contraption is reminiscent of the head gear used by Johnny Depp in "Sleepy Hollow." Katara giggles.)

Sokka: What?

(Sokka turns to her and extends the magnifying glass out a bit more and he hunches over to see her better.

Cut to an armored wagon with a small trailer traveling through a forest scene. It is pulled by a horse ostrich.

Inside, a plump merchant looks at an open cash box with glee. He plays with the coins. The camera zooms backward to reveal the whole interior of the cab. Suddenly, the carriage jolts as it comes to a sudden stop. The merchant's hat falls off and he grabs his cash box protectively. He looks around in alarm and closes and locks the cash box. Cut to a close up as the merchant begins sweating.

After a few moments of nothing, he breathes a sigh of relief. Then a broadsword blade slices through the roof in front of the camera. It slices back and forth. Cut to a shot of the roof from the merchant's p.o.v. A fist appears as it smashes a hole through the damaged roof. Through the hole the Blue Spirit is seen atop the carriage. The merchant offers the box with his eyes closed and the Blue Spirit grabs it. The merchant looks up, but the Blue Spirit is gone. Cut to an overhead shot of the carriage as the camera zooms backward. The driver is knocked out beside the carriage and the ostrich horse is gone.

Cut to a shot of the city of Chin from the sea. On the sea side of the town, there is a small temple right on the cliff overlooking the water below. Cut again to a wide overhead shot of the temple that tilts toward the bottom of the frame. Behind the temple, between it and the city walls, the benches of an amphitheatre are cut into the hillside. Three figures walk from the city to the temple.)

Mayor Tong: This is the crime scene.

(Cut to a closer shot of Aang and Katara as they approach the temple with the Mayor. Sokka looks at the camera through his magnifying glass for a moment, which makes his eye look huge. The Mayor stands right at the edge of the cliff and points to a small footprint at his feet.)

Mayor Tong: This is the footprint of the killer, Kyoshi. It was at sunset three hundred and seventy years ago today that she emerged from the temple and struck down (he indicates a statue of a stern Earth Kingdom warrior made of pink marble near the temple) Chin the Great. After that tragic day, we built this statue to immortalize our great leader. Feel free to appreciate it.

(Mayor Tong exits the scene. Sokka walks around with many sounds effects and a few small animations exaggerating his "Sherlock Holmes" routine.)

Sokka: This temple and this statue were cut from the same stone. And we know that the statue was built after Chin died.
Katara: (getting worked up) So if they were built at the same time, that means...
Sokka: (interrupting) Shhh! I wanna solve it! That means Kyoshi never set foot in this temple.
Katara: That's a big hole in the mayor's story, but it's not enough to prove Aang's innocence.
Sokka: You're right.

(He produces a water pipe out of nowhere, and proceeds to blow a few bubbles.)

Sokka: We need to go to Kyoshi Island.
Katara: Where'd you get that?

(Cut back to courtyard of the jail. An elephant rat peeks out from behind a few pots. It sniffs with its long trunk, moves forward, picks up an acorn. Aang looks at it, still in his stocks, from the background. The elephant rat jumps out of the frame with a few squeaks.)

Prisoner 1: (initially voice over) You got a bald head...

(Cut to a shot of the other end of the courtyard from Aang's p.o.v. There is a partial roof overhanging that part of the courtyard, and the voice emanates from the dark area underneath.)

Prisoner 1: ...some nice tattoos...

(He comes forward. The prisoner is a tall, muscular, bald man with tattoos of his own. He runs forward at Aang with a cry of fury, but is restrained before he reaches him by chains.)

Prisoner 1: (calmly) You're going to fit in real well around here.

(Cut to Aang, who smiles weakly. Cut to an overhead shot of Kyoshi Island, then to a shot from the ground near the watchtower on Kyoshi island. In the sky above, Appa is flying in. The watchtower guards clangs a bell.

Shift to a shot of Oyagi's house. Appa's shadow runs across it. Cut to a closer shot of Oyagi eating on his porch. He looks up with a smile. Koko and another girl run past him laughing. Appa lands in front of the statue of Kyoshi. He is surrounded by townspeople.)

Foaming Mouth Guy appears and pushes through the crowd. He does what he is best at - foaming at the mouth before fainting.)

Koko: (stomps her foot, annoyed) Where's Aangy?
Katara: He couldn't be here, Koko.
Crowd: (disappointed) Ohhh...
Koko: I wanted to see Aangy...

(The Foaming Mouth Guy gets back up and wipes the foam from his face, looking slightly embarrassed. He covers his head with part of his robe and slinks out of the frame. The crowd disperses, but Oyagi approaches them.)

Katara: Oyagi! Aang is in jail. The town of Chin says he murdered their leader in a past life.
Sokka: (looking ridiculous with his hat and pipe) They say it was Kyoshi.
Oyagi: Kyoshi? That's crazy talk! I'll take you to her shrine. Maybe something there will help you clear her name.

(Fade to the three walking up the path from the village to the shrine.)

Sokka: (with feigned casualness) So, uh... what's Suki up to? Is she around?
Oyagi: Actually, she and the other warriors left to fight in the war. You kids had a big impact on Suki. She said you inspired her and she wanted to help change the world.
Sokka: (sadly) Oh, well... that's great.

(They walk under a paifang gate and approach another temple overlooking the sea.)

Oyagi: This temple was converted into a shrine to Kyoshi.

(They enter the shrine. It is dark, and filled with Kyoshi's clothing and weapons.)

Oyagi: The clerics tell us these relics are still connected to her spirit. That's her kimono.
Katara: (touching the kimono) She had exquisite taste.
Oyagi: (quickly) Please don't touch.
Sokka: (musing with an affected voice) These fans... they were her weapons, no?
Oyagi: (wearily) Also refrain from touching the fans.
Katara: These were her boots? Her feet must have been enormous!

(Katara examines the huge pair of boots as Momo emerges from within one of them. He chitters at Katara.)

Oyagi: (full of pride) The biggest of any Avatar.
Katara: (with realization) Wait a minute... big feet? (cut to a brief vision of the small footprint by the Chin temple) Little footprints? (cut back to the present, then happily) There's no way!
Sokka: Ahem. (Sokka clears his throat, interrupting her) Special outfit Hat and pipe These things mean anything to you?
Katara: (with mock respect) You're right. I'm sorry. Please.
Sokka: (dramatically) Aha! There's no way Kyoshi could have made that footprint and therefore there is nothing linking her to the crime scene!
Katara: (unimpressed) Brilliant, Sokka.

(Cut back to a shot from Chin looking out over the ocean. It is now sunset. Pan down back to the courtyard, then cut to Aang sitting cross legged in a circle with three other prisoners.)

Prisoner 1: This girl you're talking about She'll come around. You just gotta hang in there.

(Cut to Aang who easily gets out of the stocks, and rests his elbows on top of it.)

Aang: (hopefully) You think so?

(All at once)

Prisoner 1: Sure!
Prisoner 2: Yeah.
Prisoner 3: You're a catch.
Aang: (uncertainly) I don't know...
Prisoner 1: Hey! You're smart, handsome, funny, not to mention you're the Avatar.
Aang: (smiling) You guys are great.
Prisoner 3: (touched) Don't be afraid to tell her how you feel. (wipes a tear from his eyes and sniffles.)

(Cut back to an exterior shot of the temple on Kyoshi Island, then to a shot of a beautiful mural within the temple.)

Oyagi: (o.c.) This piece is called "The Birth of Kyoshi." (all walk into view) It was painted at sunrise on the day this island was founded. Why, it was today, in fact, three hundred and seventy years ago.
Sokka: (spits out his pipe at the surprise information) Three hundred and seventy years... wait, (grabs Oyagi by the lapels) are you sure it was today?
Oyagi: (annoyed) Seeing how it's Kyoshi Day, yes, (throwing Sokka backwards) I'm sure.
Sokka: This ceremony didn't take place at sunrise; it took place at sunset. Look at the shadows.
Katara: They point east. So the sun must have been in the west.
Oyagi: So what?
Sokka: (shoves Katara out of the way) If Kyoshi was in the ceremony at sunset, she couldn't have been in Chin committing the crime. (points his pipe dramatically and the magnifying glass swing in front of his eye) She has an alibi!

(Katara, only her arm visible, takes his pipe and hits him over the head with it.

Fade back to exterior, night shot of Chin.)

Katara: (formally, and in voice over at first) Honorable mayor, (cut to a shot of the kids and the Mayor at Aang's jail) we've prepared a solid defense for the Avatar. We did an investigation and found some very strong evidence.

(Cut to Sokka leaning over to Aang and giving him a big smilie face, which Aang returns.)

Mayor Tong: Evidence? Hmph! That's not how our court system works.
Aang: Then how can I prove my innocence?
Mayor Tong: Simple. I say what happened and then you say what happened and then I decide who's right.

(Aang and friends gasps in unison, looking horrified.)

Mayor Tong: That's why we call it justice. Because it's "just us." Hahaha!

(The Mayor walks off laughing maniacally. Cut to black for commercial break.)



Act III

(The show returns to a wide profile shot of the amphitheatre, statue of Chin and the temple behind the town of Chin. Cut to Mayor Tong addressing the crowd that populates the benches of the amphitheatre.)

Mayor Tong: Everyone loved Chin the Great because he was so great. Then the Avatar (pointing to Aang behind him, still in the stocks) showed up and killed him! And that's how it happened.

(Walks o.c. with a self satisfied smile.)

Bailiff: (deep monotone) The accused will now present its argument.
Sokka: (quietly) You can do it, Aang. Just remember the evidence.
Aang: Right... evidence. Ladies and gentlemen, I'm about to tell you what really happened. And I will prove it with facts. Fact number one... (Aang blanks) Uh...
Sokka: (quietly prompting) The footprints!
Aang: Oh, yeah... (to the crowd) You see, I have very large feet.

(Camera tilts down to show Aang's little feet. The crowd looks unimpressed.)

Aang: (unpersuasively) Furthermore, your... temple matches your statue. But... I was in a painting at sunset. (wraps it up fast with a big smile) So there you have it! I'm not guilty!

(Cut to the crowd, which continued to be unimpressed, then tilt down to Katara, Sokka and Momo, both with big smiles son their faces, and Sokka giving a "thumbs up" gesture.)

Sokka: (aside to Katara, both still smiling) He's dead.

(Cut to Zuko and Iroh in their cave. A fire crackles nearby.)

Iroh: Looks like you did some serious shopping. (Iroh walks around the fire and sits, inspecting a gold teapot in front of him) But where did you get the money?
Zuko: (avoids the question) Do you like your new teapot?
Iroh: To be honest with you, the best tea tastes delicious whether it comes in a porcelain pot or a tin cup. (walking over to Zuko who lies with his back to the opposite wall of the cave) I know we've had some difficult times lately. We've had to struggle just to get by. (puts his had on Zuko's shoulder) But it's nothing to be ashamed of. There is a simple honor in poverty.
Zuko: There's no honor for me without the Avatar.
Iroh: Zuko... (sighs) Even if you did capture the Avatar, I'm not so sure it would solve our problems. Not now.
Zuko: (abruptly) Then there is no hope at all.

(Zuko turns to get up.)

Iroh: (quickly) No, Zuko! You must never give in to despair. Allow yourself to slip down that road and you surrender to your lowest instincts. (Cut to Iroh's p.o.v, he continues o.c.) In the darkest times, hope is something you give yourself. That is the meaning of inner strength.

(Zuko looks back at his uncle for a moment, then gets up to leave. He walks away form the cave.

Cut back to the trial.)

Katara: Mayor Tong, I'd like for the court to hear one last testimony.
Mayor Tong: (jumping up in anger) I've already told you! It's just me and the accused. You can't call any witnesses.
Katara: This isn't just any witness. I'm going to call... (gestures widely with her arms) Avatar Kyoshi herself!

(Crowd mumbles a lot, then cut to the bailiff walking toward the camera. He turns and exits the frame to reveal Aang wearing Kyoshi's clothes, his face painted like her as well. Cut to a skeptical shot of Mayor Tong, then Katara sitting back beside her brother.)

Sokka: (whispers) What are you doing?
Katara: Well, she is Aang's past life. Maybe wearing her stuff will trigger something.
Sokka: (adjusting his magnifying glass and accepting Katara's reason) I do believe in the power of stuff.
Mayor Tong: (protesting) This is a mockery of Chin law!
Katara: (pleading) Please! If you could just wait one more second, I'm sure Kyoshi will be here.

(Camera flashes over to a wide shot of Aang looking ridiculous in Kyoshi's huge outfit, one of her fans in front of his face.)

Aang: (in an uncertain, mock female voice) Hey, everybody. (He drops the fan slightly to reveal his painted face and his eyes blink to a sound effect) Avatar Kyoshi here.
Mayor Tong: This is ridiculous. For the murder of Chin the Great, this court finds the Avatar...

(As Mayor Tong tries to finish, a whirlwind appears around Aang, obscuring him from view. The sky darkens. Cut to a wide shot of the town and the cliff it sits upon. The sky darkens all around it. Cut back to Aang and the Mayor. The whirlwind around Aang disperses to reveal Avatar Kyoshi herself, resplendent in her kimono. Cut to a close up of her face. She lifts her head to look at the camera.)

Avatar Kyoshi: I killed Chin the Conqueror.

(The screen flashes and a vision begins, narrated by a voice over from Kyoshi. The vision begins with a profile shot of the man from the statue. He sits on a throne, soldiers and retainers in the background. A man kneels before him in supplication. He stands and earthbending a lump of stone out of the floor, casting the supplicant out of the frame.)

Avatar Kyoshi: (voice over) A horrible tyrant, (cut to a close up of the stern tyrant) Chin was expanding his army to all corners of the continent.

(Cut to a shot of a map of the Earth Kingdom. The white map is slowly spread over by a green shaded area. It begins in the northwest, spreads to the interior seas, and then north to the mountains and south to the islands. Only the enormous crater like feature in the northeast remains unconquered.

The screen flashes again to show Chin's army in formation on a battlefield. As Kyoshi's speaks, the camera pans to show Chin in armor standing at the head of his troops.)

Avatar Kyoshi: (voice over) When they came to the neck of the peninsula where we lived, he demanded our immediate surrender.

(Chin stomps his foot once. The cut to Kyoshi walking towards Chin, who is o.c. to the left.)

Avatar Kyoshi: (voice over) I warned him that I would not sit passively and while he took our home, but he did not back down.

(Kyoshi stops, and the camera pans left suddenly to put them both in the same frame. Kyoshi is probably more than a foot taller than Chin.

Chin assumes an earthbending stance. Cut to a frontal shot of Kyoshi. She raises her fan and blows Chin's clothes off him right down to his underwear. Chin is surprised. Cut back to Kyoshi.)

Avatar Kyoshi: (voice over) On that day, we split from the mainland.

(Kyoshi closes her eyes, and opens them. They glow white briefly, then the camera zooms backwards. She jumps up, extends her fans, and slices one in a sweeping motion to her left. Cut to a wide shot of the peninsula, which rips open from her position all the way to where the land meets the sea as the army looks on. She does the same on her other side, then straightens up and closes her fans in one smooth motion.

After a brief moment looking at the camera, she jumps up and lands with her legs bent and her tows pointed sideways. She strikes the ground with her two closed fans. Cut to Chin's grave face, who maintains his earthbending stance despite the power displayed before him.

Shift to an underground shot which rips open to reveal Kyoshi standing atop the fissure. Kyoshi waves her fans in a few quick, but elaborate gestures and raises a wall of intense flame from the breach. The wall rises high into the air.

The wall of flame then drops, and Kyoshi creates a gale that blows most of the army away behind Chin and pushes the island at ever increasing speed away from the mainland. Once the island is out of sight, Chin screams in frustration at his defeat. As he yells, the rock underneath him, which now hangs out over a shear drop to the surf below, crumbles. He falls into the water below.

The vision ends. Fade from the newly made cliff in the past to the an overhead shot of the same area in the present.)

Avatar Kyoshi: (voice over) I created Kyoshi Island (cut to Kyoshi's face) so my people could be safe from invaders.

(She lowers her face, and is consumed again by the whirlwind. The artificial darkness gets reeled back in by the wind. Soon, Aang is himself again, though drained. Katara runs forward and holds up as he threatens to faint. He drops one of Kyoshi's fans.)

Aang: (confused) So... what just happened?
Katara: Uhh... you kind of confessed. Sorry.
Mayor Tong: (getting up in the background and brushing himself off) And I find you guilty! Bring out the wheel of punishment!

(Cut to a wide shot as the crowd cheers. Cut to a shot of Momo who chitters and hides his face with his tail.

Shift scene to Zuko standing behind Iroh, whose back is to the camera, at their cave.)

Zuko: Uncle, I thought a lot about what you said.

(Cut to a frontal shot of Iroh, Zuko visible in the background. Iroh turns his head towards his nephew.)

Iroh: (pleased) You did? Good, good.
Zuko: (without malice, but also without hesitation) It's helped me realize something. We no longer have anything to gain by traveling together. I need to find my own way.

(Cut to a shot of Iroh's back. He looks down and slumps slightly in sadness. Cut to Zuko outside the cave. He picks up a pack and begins to walk away.)

Iroh: Wait!

(Iroh leads over their stolen ostrich horse and places the reigns in Zuko's hands. Zuko looks back at his uncle once, then shakes the reigns and gallops away.

Cut back to the trial, where a tilting down shot of the city reveals Aang, still in Kyoshi's garb, standing before a wheel.)

Bailiff: (deep monotone) The accused will now spin the wheel of punishment to determine his sentence.

(Cut to a shot from behind Aang. The wheel is divided into eight wedges. Each of the wedges has a symbol on it that indicates the punishments he might draw. Among them are getting boiled in oil, a torture machine, eaten by a bear, eaten by a shark, forced to lie on a bed of spikes, getting burned alive, falling into a pit of razors, and community service. On top is an indicator that determines the punishment when the wheel stops spinning.)

Aang: I said I would face justice, so I will.

(He spins the wheel.)

Spectator 1: (rooting) Come on, torture machine!
Old Man: Eaten by bears!
Spectator 2: Razor pit!
Katara: (worried) Community service! Please stop on community service.
Bailiff: Looks like it's "boiled in oil."

(Cut to a wide shot of the plaza as the crowd cheers, then to close up of Aang's face, the worry showing through the Kyoshi make up.

The crowd cheers some more, and Aang looks dejected. Suddenly, a lit firebomb gets thrown into the screen. It bounces a few times before exploding. Cut to Sokka and Katara shielding themselves from the blast, then looking up at the voice they hear a moment later.)

Colonel Mongke: (voice over) We've come to (shot expands to show the Colonel on his rhino and two others mounting the top of the amphitheatre) claim this village for the Fire Lord! Now show me your leader so I may... (cut to a soldier who uses his halberd to destroy the statue of Chin the Conqueror) ...dethrone him.
Spectator 3: That's him over there!

(The spectator points to the Mayor who hides behind the wheel.)

Mayor Tong: (cowers) You! Avatar! Do something!
Aang: (calmly) Gee, I'd love to help, but I'm supposed to be boiled in oil.
Mayor Tong: (spins the wheel to the community service wedge and stops it there) There! "Community service." Now serve our community and get rid of those rhinos!

(Aang smiles and runs forward. He jumps into the air, shedding most of Kyoshi's clothing except for her headdress. The camera zooms backward to reveal a rhino in the foreground. The rider readies his halberd. Cut to a shot behind Aang as he runs at the rhino, the camera following close behind. He leans forward and extends his arms out behind him like a fighter jet. Each hand holds one of Kyoshi's fans, which he opens as he runs. He spins aside out of the rhino's way at the last moment and uses the fan to airbend the rider out of his seat and off the side of the cliff.

Cut to the Mayor who peeps out over the wheel as a rhino bears down on him. He turns in horror and slides down the back of the wheel. His eyes bug out as the creatures three horns bust through the wheel, one just above each shoulder and one between his legs.

Cut to Aang, who locks eyes briefly with the Colonel.)

Colonel Mongke : Rough Rhinos, to the town!

(Cut to a shot of the rhinos and their rhinos now setting the town on fire with arrows and blasts of fire from their hands. The masked rider runs by a hay wagon and drops three sticks of dynamite into it. The wagon explodes as another rhino rushes by.

Shift to another Fire Nation shoulder, shirtless and screaming as he throws a flail at Katara. She draws some water from her skin and uses the water to bend the flail back against her attacker. He is bound and helpless by his own weapon. She then whips the rhino with her water and it runs o.c.

Cut to Sokka looking from behind a street corner at the Fire Nation archer. He lits two arrows ready to fire. Sokka uses reflected sun form his magnifying glass to distract him. The archer turns and fires the arrows. These miss Sokka, but they do take his silly hat on the way toward hitting the side bag attached to the masked Fire Nation's soldier rhino who had just appeared behind Sokka. The side bag contains four sticks of dynamite. Sokka smiles and ducks.

The masked man picks up the bag and throws it on the roof of a neighboring house. A moment later the house disappears under the thunderous explosion. The fate the masked man is unknown since the view of him was blocked by another building, but a moment later his helmet rolls by Sokka still crouched on the ground. Another bag also rolls into the frame, his boomerang hanging out of it.)

Sokka: (happily) Boomerang! You do always come back!

(The archer has returned and aims more arrows at Sokka, who throws his water pipe. The pipe sails through the air and engulfs both arrows in its maw - putting out their fires. The archer looks closely at the contraption in wonder.

Cut to Katara facing off against another rider. She uses her water whip to cut the saddle straps. The rider falls off and starts getting dragged by his animal. Katara replaces the water into her skin.

Cut to Aang running across a t junction. He still wears Kyoshi's headdress and has her fans. He stops in the middle of the junction and looks down the street at the camera. Cut to the other end of the street where Colonel Mongke's and his rhino appear. He and Aang look at each other. With a few quick movements, Mongke produces a constant flame from both arms and begins to charge at Aang at a gallop.

Aang runs at him as well. He jumps of the wall of alley and propels himself over the Colonel's head, using the fans and a blast of air to deflect the stream of fire. He drops down on the other side of the street having turned around in mid air. The acrobatics cost him the rest of Kyoshi's gear, which fall a few seconds apart from each other around him. He gets back up and makes an air scooter. He hops on and runs down the street as the Colonel charges him again. He goes under the Colonel's rhino, avoiding his fire. He in turn avoids Aang's blast of air.

The two antagonists have again reached opposite ends of the street. They face each other again, with a quick pan left shot on the Colonel and a pan right shot of Aang to accentuate the conflict. They run at each other again. Aang jumps into the air as he approaches, sails right through a blast of fire, and kicks the Colonel off the rhino with his feet. The Colonel lands o.c. with a crash as he passes through a wall.

Fade to a night shot of fireworks in the sky, and confetti falling in front of the screen.)

Mayor Tong: (voice over) From now on, (camera pans down to show the kids, backs to the camera, facing the crowd in the plaza) we'll celebrate a new Avatar Day (cut to a frontal shot of the three kids, grinning) in honor of the day Avatar Aang saved us from the Rough Rhino Invasion.

(They each hold a bowl. Sokka looks down at his.)

Sokka: What is this?

(Cut to a shot of the cookies in the bowl, which look like they are melting.)

Mayor Tong: (voice over) That's our new festival food: (cut back to the Mayor) unfried dough. May we eat it (turns to address the crowd) and be reminded of how on this day the Avatar was not boiled in oil.

(Crowd cheers. The three kids look uncertain. They each pick up a dough cookie. Cut to a closer shot of Katara, the cookie drooping in her fingers.)

Katara: (halfheartedly) Happy Avatar Day, everyone.

(She eats it and the camera pans right to Aang, who has one hanging out of his mouth, then shows Sokka as well.)

Sokka: This is by far the worst town we've ever been to.

(They eat a few more cookies. Screen fades to white.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence, including clips from "The Cave of Two Lovers", "Return to Omashu", and "The Swamp".]



Act I

(After the preview, the episode opens with a pan right shot of a village nestled on low hills. A few mountains rise in the distance. Cut to a street corner scene, then cut to a close up shot of a green bag with a shoulder strap.)

Sokka: (voice over) It's pricey, but I really do like it.

(Camera zooms backward to reveal the three kids in an open air shop. Sokka is looking at the bag. Katara, with Momo on her shoulder, looks at him with some concern. Aang sits on the floor, looking somewhat bored and unhappy.)

Katara: Then you should get it. You deserve something nice.
Sokka: (turns to her with a smile) I do, don't I? (turns back with an exaggerated gesture) But no. It's too expensive, I shouldn't.
Katara: (slightly annoyed) Alright, then don't.

(She turns and walks out of the frame. Aang gets up and follows her. Sokka goes last, looking wistfully back at the bag. The frame is empty for a moment before Sokka returns and stands behind the bag, his hands clasped in front of him. Sight Gag: Sokka's face goes slightly chibi as he smiles at the bag.)

Sokka: You know what? I'm gonna get it.

(Cut to a wide shot of Katara and Aang standing in the street. A man nears with a paper in his hand turns around and speaks to them.)

Man: Psst, psst. Hey, you kids like earthbending? You like throwing rocks? Then check out Master Yu's Earthbending Academy.

(He hands Aang a flyer with a smile and leaves. Cut to a close up of the flyer. Aang flips it over to reveal the other side.)

Aang: (voice over) Look, there's a coupon on the back. The first lesson is free.

(Cut to a wider shot of the two.)

Katara: Who knows? This Master Yu could be the earthbending teacher you've been looking for.

(Sokka enters the frame from the right, the green bag cradled in his arms.

Quick fade to the front gate of a dojo compound. The gate is a paifang with a large green sign with Chinese characters written across it.

Cut to a shot tilting up of Aang in a dark green earthbender training uniform and a round helmet. He looks confused. He picks his ear with his finger, then sniffs his finger. Cut to a zooming back shot of Aang from the p.o.v. of the end of the line of boys of which he is a member. The boys are younger and smaller than he is by a head. They stand resolute, looking forward. Aang stands up straight in imitation of them.

Shift to a wide shot of the compound. On the left is a line of four boys with a stone in front of them. On the right is a line of fours boys, including Aang without any stones. A man, Master Yu, enters the frame in the foreground, only his back visible to the camera.)

Yu: Take your stances.

(The students except Aang assume earthbending stances. He walks between the two lines then cut to a closer shot of him.)

Yu: Now, strike as if you're punching through your opponents head!

(Master Yu strikes a pose as he says this, then cut to a wide shot of Yu and the two lines facing each other. The line on the lift their rocks and throws them at the line on the right.

Cut to a close up of Aang looking alarmed, then a split second close up of the boy across from Aang chucking the rock at him. The rock hits Aang square in the chest and knocks him backwards into a large ceramic pot behind him. The pot explodes in a cloud of dust and fragments.

Cut to Aang's p.o.v. amidst the wreckage. Master Yu approaches him with a smile.)

Yu: So, are you ready to commit to more lessons? (Cut to a closer shot of Yu) If you pay for the whole year in advance, I'll bump you up to the next belt.

(Shift back to Aang, buried in the rubble. His face is covered as more debris slides down over him.

Cut to a wide shot of Aang excited the dojo through the paifang gate. Sokka and Katara sit just outside.)

Aang: (disappointed) He's not the one.

(Aang leans over and pats one side of his head, ejecting bits of dirt from his ear. The last two boys exit the gate and their conversation is heard.)

Student 1: I think The Boulder is gonna win back the belt at Earth Rumble 6.
Student 2: He's gonna (cut to a close up of Aang's face) have to fight his way through the best earthbenders in the world to even get a shot at the champ.
Aang: Excuse me, (runs over to the boys, cut to wider shot of the three) but where is this earthbending tournament exactly?
Student 1: It's on the Island of Noneoya - none o' ya business!

(Both laugh and walk away. Cut back to Aang, Sokka and Katara visible behind him. Sokka begins to laugh as he and his sister walk up behind Aang. Katara looks peeved at the boys' treatment of Aang.)

Sokka: Ha, ha! Oh, I got to remember that one.

(Katara smiles and puts her hands on Aang's shoulder and left arm.)

Katara: (in a comforting tone) I'll take care of this.

(Cut to a view down the street and the right turn into a side street where the two boys disappeared into. Katara runs into the frame, waving her right hand in the air.)

Katara: Hey strong guys, wait up!

(Katara disappears around the corner. Cut to Aang and Sokka, who holds out his new bag in disdain.)

Sokka: What was I thinking? I don't need a new bag. Why'd you let me buy this?

(Sokka drops the bag and folds his arms crossly. Momo, perched on Sokka's shoulder, looks down at the bag. He jumps down into the bag. Cut to a close shot of Momo settling in for some sleep, chittering happily. Cut back to a wider shot as Katara runs back into the frame.)

Katara: You ready to find an earthbending teacher? Because we're going to Earth Rumble 6!
Aang: How did you get them to tell you?
Katara: Oh, (looks over her shoulder coyly) a girl has her ways.

(Cut to a shot of the two boys looking down at the camera. They are frozen from the neck down. Shift to a wider shot. Their feet are frozen to the walls of the buildings that line each side of the street. Their heads touch each other and together they form a gate or archway over the street.

Fade to a night scene in the mountains. In the distance at the bottom of the frame is the brightly lit entrance to a cave. People are lined up to enter.

Cut to an underground stadium with a wide shot of the rectangular earthbending arena. The center of the arena is dominated by a large stone circle with a square punched out of its center. In the background on the lift is a tower atop which the master of the games announces the matches. Around the rest of the arena are the stands. There is an empty space all around the arena between it and the stands.

Shift to a closer shot of the stands. They are empty in the immediate vicinity as the three kids enter the frame from the left.)

Aang: Hey, front row seats! I wonder why no one else is sitting here.

(They sit down. A moment later the camera zooms backward as a massive boulder slams into the seats to their right, showering them with dust and debris.)

Sokka: I guess that's why.

(Cut to a shot from just behind the three kids looking at the arena. A man earthbends a mighty explosion of rock and dirt at its center. A huge column of earth begins to raise the man upwards. It stops rising. The man motions and the column collapses back to floor level. Cut to a close of the man's face. It is strong, cruel, and mostly obscured by long, luxurious black hair.)

Xin Fu: Welcome to Earth Rumble 6! (cut to wide, panning right shot of the arena, Xin Fu continues in voice over) I am your host, Xin Fu!

(Cut to a frontal shot of the kids. Aang, Sokka and Momo look at the arena, while Katara has turned sideways and adopted a bored pose.)

Katara: This is just gonna be a bunch of guys chuckin' rocks at each other, isn't it?
Sokka: (hopefully) That's what I paid for.

(Cut back to Xin Fu.)

Xin Fu: The rules are simple. Just knock the other guy out of the ring and you win.

(He earthbends himself back to the announcer's tower and continues in voice over. Cut to a muscular earthbender with a tattoo on his back. He raises his arms in a salute to the crowd and grins confidently.)

Xin Fu: Round one! The Boulder (cut to a long shot of The Boulder as a huge foot crashes onto the floor in the foreground. Cut to a frontal shot of a huge fat man) versus The Big Bad Hippo! (cut to a close up of the Hippo, who opens his mouth to reveal four hippo like teeth as he roars.)
Boulder: (in exaggerated, WWF type voice) Listen up, Hippo. You may be big, but you ain't bad! (grinning insanely) The Boulder's gonna win this in a landslide.

(Cut to a frontal shot of the Hippo, who raises his arms high in the air.)

Hippo: Hippo mad!

(The Boulder earthbends a boulder at the Hippo, who catches part of it in his mouth, crushes it and spits it out. The Hippo then begins to jump up and down. His enormous bulk actually causes the arena to shake around. The Boulder wobbles backwards on the verge of losing his balance.)

Xin Fu: Unbelievable, ladies and gentlemen! The Hippo is rocking The Boulder!

(As The Boulder reaches the edge of the arena, he earthbends a sheet of rock out of the side of the arena and throws it at his opponent. It hits the Hippo's back and he turns around to face the Boulder once more. The Boulder, with a tremendous effort, then earthbends the Hippo off the floor and throws him over the side of the arena.)

Xin Fu: The Boulder wins!

(Cut to a wide shot from behind the three kids. The Boulder raises his arms in victory. Cut to an off angle shot of Aang and Katara. She turns to him questioningly.)

Katara: How about The Boulder? He's got some good moves.
Aang: (hesitantly) I don't know. Bumi said I need a teacher who listens to the earth. He's just listening to his big muscles. What do you think, Sokka?

(Shot widens to show Sokka in the foreground.)

Sokka: (excitedly) Ha ha! Whoo!

(Cut to a long shot from the arena looking up at Xin Fu atop the tower.)

Xin Fu: Next, The Boulder versus (cut to a shot of Fire Nation Man waving the Fire Nation flag and smiling, Xin Fu continues in voice over) Fire Nation Man!

(The crowd boos audibly as Fire Nation Man walks across a stone bridge to the arena floor waving his flag. The bridge crumbles behind him. Cut back to Sokka.)

Sokka: (giving thumbs down) Boo! Boo!

(Cut back to wide shot of Fire Nation Man holding the flag upright and addressing the crowd.)

Fire Nation Man: Please to rise for Fire Nation national anthem. (singing) Fire Lord, my flame (drops to his knees) burns for thee!

(Crowd boos and throws small stones at him. Cut to Sokka with a stone cocked back in his hand, ready to throw.)

Sokka: Go back to the Fire Nation!

(He throws the stone, which hits Fire Nation Man on the head. His anger is cut short as he is twisted violently around and sinks into the earthen floor of the arena. In a flash he is buried up to shoulders in the arena floor. Cut to a shot from behind Fire Nation Man's buried figure. He stares ahead at The Boulder, who raises himself up on a huge column of earth.

Cut to a shot looking down at Fire Nation Man, who looks petrified.)

Fire Nation Man: No. No please!

(Cut to the Boulder atop of the column, who grins and jumps off. He sails downward with his legs bent at the knees so he can hold his feet with his hands. He hits the ground in front of Fire Nation Man, who is hurled high into the air and out of the arena on impact. Cut to a shot of the kids and the rock that hit near them earlier. A second later Fire Nation Man flies into the picture and slams into the rock.)

Sokka: (looking at Fire Nation Man's impact point) Yeah! Whoo! The Boulder knows how to put the hurt in the dirt! (cut to a close up of Sokka looking insane and making taunting faces) Yeah! Whoo!

(Cut to a shot of a guy driving a badger mole across the arena. The badger mole uses his claws and earthbending powers to act as a zamboni, clearing up the arena for the next fight. Carnival type music plays in the background. Cut to a quick shot of an attractive woman in a white, sleeveless dress waltz across the screen bearing a placard for the crowd to see.

Several matches now pass by in rapid succession. The Boulder defeats every contestant he faces. The first is a gopher type guy who tunnels under the ground and bursts out in quick attacks. The next is a thin guy in a green mask who goes shirtless. The third is a guy with a painted face. Each is depicted in defeat with a stylized still that looks like a frame from a comic book. After the last is defeated, switch to a long shot of the announcer's tower.)

Xin Fu: Now, the moment you've all been waiting for. The Boulder (cut to a shot of short person with black hair mostly obscured by a green prize belt) versus your champion...

(The views tilts down, the looks up to reveal a young girl with milk white eyes. She wears a green cape and a simple, but attractive green and white earthbending uniform. On her head she has a black and green headband. Above her head show holds the green prize belt.)

Xin Fu: The Blind Bandit!

(The crowd chants "bandit" as the screen expands to reveal two young women next to the Bandit who remove her cape and take the belt. Cut to a shot of Aang and Katara.)

Katara: She can't really be blind. (cut to a close up of the Bandit's eyes that pans right) It's just part of her character, right?

(Cut back to Aang and Katara.)

Aang: I think she is.

(Screen expands to show Sokka.)

Sokka: I think she is... (yells) going down!

(Cut to a shot of the Bandit. The camera rapidly zooms backward to a wide shot. The Boulder's foot crashes down in the foreground, then cut to a front shot of The Boulder.)

Boulder: The Boulder feels conflicted about fighting a young, blind girl.
Toph: (pointing at the Boulder and in a mocking tone) Sounds to me like you're scared, Boulder.
Boulder: (after a pause where he looks stung) The Boulder's over his conflicted feelings, and now he's ready to bury you (screen expands instantly and the Boulder makes a dramatic, crushing gesture) in a rock-a-lanche!
Toph: (points again at her opponent) Whenever you're ready...The Pebble. (throws her head back) Ha ha ha!

(Cut back to a close up of Aang, then to a flashback from "The Swamp" where he saw the girl in white and the flying boar. He remembers her laugh. It is the same as the Bandit's. The flashback shows a closer shot of the girl in the fancy dress. The camera closes in and turns around the girl to reveal her face. It is the Bandit's. The flashback ends in a flash of white to reveal Aang's stunned face.)

Boulder: It's on!

(Cut back to a shot from behind The Boulder who faces the Bandit, then shift to a tilting down shot of The Boulder's head. Despite his bravado, he is sweating profusely.

Switch to a frontal shot of the Bandit. The camera whirls around her head and ends with a close up shot of her ear.

Cut back to The Boulder, who yells and takes a step forward. As his heel hits the ground, the frame freezes and goes to black and white. Shock waves in white move out from his heel where it is has struck the floor of the arena. Cut to an overhead shot of The Boulder showing the shock wave emanating away from his heel in neat concentric circles. Cut again to the Bandit standing perfectly still. The shock wave reaches her and travels up her body.

Return to a frontal shot of the Bandit in full color. She moves forward and opens her arms as soon as she registers the shock wave indicating the movement of her opponent. Cut to a shot of her feet as she moves forward to finish the set up for her attack. The Boulder moves forward at a slow frame rate. He is bellowing a battle cry, but it is slurred due to the slow frame rate. Cut to a wider shot of The Boulder. As his foot strikes the ground again, the screen flashes black and white again as another shock wave is shown moving out from him. Cut back to a frontal shot of the Bandit who has begin to swing her right foot in an arc towards the ground in font of her. As she strikes the ground, the view cuts to a wide shot from behind and above her right shoulder. The frame rate speeds up to normal. Her strike creates a shock waves in the arena floor that churns up the ground and heads toward the Boulder in a straight line as if a gopher were tunneling toward him at great speed.

We see a quick shot of Aang staring incredulously at the camera, his face turning to follow the Bandit's shock wave travel o.c. in front of him.

Cut back to a frontal shot of the Boulder whose foot meets the shock wave just as he puts it back on the ground. The shock wave makes him drop down onto the ground in a perfect split. Cut to briefly to Momo and Sokka. Momo squeaks and Sokka's look of adulation and excitement turns to a look of pain. Cut back to a close shot from above The Boulder. He looks up into the camera with a look of excruciating pain on his face.)

Boulder: (in pain) Ooh!

(Cut back to the Bandit who makes a chopping motion with her right hand. Three stalagmites erupt from the ground near The Boulder and eject him from the ring. He slams into the wall beneath the stands and slides down into the crevice between the arena and the stands.

Shift to a close up of the Bandit's face, which softens into a crafty and satisfied smile as Xin Fu speaks.)

Xin Fu: (voice over) Your winner, (cut to wider shot of the Bandit, who raises her right fist in victory) and still the champion, The Blind Bandit!

(Cut back to Aang and Sokka.)

Sokka: (crying) No!

(Camera zooms back to show Katara as well. Sokka slumps in the background.)

Katara: (incredulously) How did she do that?

(Cut to a close up of Aang.)

Aang: She waited, (turns to Katara) and listened.

(Cut to a wide shot of the announcer's tower as Xin Fu jumps from it to the arena floor. He holds a green bag in his left hand.)

Xin Fu: To make things a little more interesting, I'm offering up this sack of gold pieces to anyone who can defeat (he motions toward the champion) The Blind Bandit! What No one dares to face her?
Aang: I will!

(Xin Fu looks worried for a moment, before a cut to Aang onto the arena. The crowd murmurs its approval. Shift to a long, wide shot of Aang closing the distance between he and the Bandit. Xin Fu jumps out of the screen. Cut to Sokka and Katara.)

Sokka: (cupping his hands to his mouth) Go Aang! Avenge The Boulder!

(Cut to a shot from behind Aang. The Bandit is in front of him.)

Toph: Do people really want to see two little girls fighting out here?

(The crowd goes "ooooh" at this bit of taunting. Aang puts his hands up in a conciliatory gesture.)

Aang: I don't really want to fight you. I want to talk to you.

(Cut to Sokka and Katara.)

Sokka: Boo! No talking!
Katara: (smacking her brother) Don't boo at him!

(Cut to Aang's feet. He takes a step, then cut back to the Bandit, who smiles as soon as his foot hits the ground. She stomps the ground with the side of her left foot. A shock wave travels across the ground and causing a large rock to grow out of the ground underneath Aang, who is launched into the air. He lands softly on the ground behind her. She turns around with an upset expression on her face.)

Toph: Somebody's a little light on his feet. What's your fighting name, (cut to Aang, the Bandit continues in voice over) The Fancy Dancer?

(Aang smiles and shrugs his shoulders. Another rock erupts from the ground and launches Aang into the air. He somersaults through the air.)

Toph: Where'd you go?

(Aang lands behind her.)

Aang: Please, wait!
Toph: There you are!

(She turns quickly, raises a boulder and throws at him in a straight line, like a bullet. The crowd cheers. Cut to Aang's p.o.v. as the rock approaches him rapidly. He jumps into the air, turns and airbends the rock backwards. Cut to a shot from behind the bandit. She and the rock are blown backward and off the arena. Quick shots of Xin Fu, The Boulder, and the Water Tribe siblings confirm their collective shock. Cut back to Aang, who looks around in surprise as the crowd cheers.

Cut to a shot of the Bandit walking away from the base of the arena. In the background is a set of stairs. Aang is at the top of the stairs and he calls after the former champion.)

Aang: Please listen! I need an earthbending teacher, and I think it's supposed to be you.
Toph: Whoever you are, just leave me alone.

(She opens a door in the wall with a stomp of her foot. She enters, turns and closes the door with a motion of her hands.)

Aang: Wait!

(Aang reaches the wall too late. He turns and looks sad. Cut to Xin Fu holding the belt and the bag of gold, the crowd cheering behind them. Katara and Sokka enter the frame from the right. Sokka hugs Xin Fu and takes the money and the belt. He puts his arm around Aang's shoulder, but the Avatar is still morose.)

Sokka: Way to go, champ!

(Aang's head droops in sadness, then cut to black for commercial.)



Act II

(The show returns to a brief shot of the village nestled amongst the mountains before cutting to the kids walking down a street. Cut to a frontal shot of Sokka, who is wearing both his new bag and the tournament belt.)

Sokka: I gotta admit, now I'm really glad I bought this bag. It matches the belt perfectly.
Katara: (sarcastically) That is a big relief.
Aang: If we want to find The Blind Bandit, the Earthbending Academy is a good place to start.

(They enter the gate of Master Yu's academy once again. Cut to a few shots of the two boys Katara froze punching dirt contained in two huge pots. They look up as the kids enter.)

Student 1: Oh great, you again.

(Cut to a frontal shot of the kids. Katara, between Sokka and Aang, looks forward and looks mean. The two students flinch backwards in fright.)

Katara: Yeah, I didn't think so.
Sokka: Nicely done.
Student 2: Hey, (walking towards Aang) you're the kid who beat The Blind Bandit.
Aang: We need to talk to her. Do you guys know where she lives?
Student 1: The Blind Bandit's a mystery. She shows up to fight, then disappears.

(Aang looks disappointed. Katara notices and puts a hand on his shoulder.)

Katara: Let me handle this. (pointing at student #2 and saying angrily) You're not telling us everything!
Student 2: (hands up) No no, I swear it's true! No one knows where she goes, or who she really is.
Aang: (almost lost in thought) That's because we're asking about the wrong person. In my vision, I saw a girl in a white dress with a pet flying boar. Know anybody like that?

(Cut back to a frontal shot of the two students. Student # 2 now hides behind student #1.)

Student 1: Well, a flying boar is the symbol of the Bei Fong family. They're the richest people in town, probably the whole world.
Student 2: Yeah, but they don't have a daughter.
Aang: Flying boar is good enough for me. (to his friends) Let's check it out.

(Cut to a profile shot of the faces of the two students. They try to look tough.)

Student 1: (quietly) Yeah, you better leave.

(Cut to Katara turning as she exits the compound. She put two fingers up to her eyes.)

Katara: Hey, I've got my eye on you.

(Katara exits as Sokka enters the frame, his arms out like an airplane.)

Sokka: (whispers with a smile) Water Tribe.

(He exits. Cut to two figures standing at the opening of a tunnel. They are silhouetted by the light coming in from outside the cave, though it does not look like sunlight. It would appear they stand at an entrance into the arena.)

Boulder: I'm telling you, The Boulder was standing right there. I saw the kid strike, but there was no earthbending. (cut to a frontal shot of The Boulder and Xin Fu) Nothing made contact. The Blind Bandit just fell out of the ring. She must have took a dive and split the money with the kid.

(Cut to a shot of Xin Fu's dist banging into the wall of the cave exit. Rocks falls down onto his foot. He screams, then recovers, his expression angry.)

Xin Fu: Nobody cheats Xin Fu.

(Shift to a wide, overhead shot of a beautiful, walled country estate with a lovely garden and many ponds. It is daylight. A shot of the gate tilts up to reveal a crest with a flying boar emblazoned upon it. Cut to the three kids spying on the gate.)

Aang: That's the flying boar from my vision. Come on.

(The kids back away from their vantage point, then cut to a shot from inside the compound. Aang airbends himself over the wall, then Sokka and Katara climb over. They run across some open grass, then cut to a close up shot of a large bush. Aang's head pokes out below, then Katara's on top of his, then Sokka's on top. Each appears in rapid succession one after the other in a very "Scooby-Doo" like fashion.

Suddenly a huge surge of earth throws them all into the air. They yell as they fall land unceremoniously, Sokka onto the ground and Aang and Katara into nearby bushes. Aang looks up, then cut to an upside down shot of the Bandit, now in her fancy gown.)

Toph: What are you doing here, twinkle toes?
Aang: How did you know it was me?
Sokka: (whining) Don't answer to twinkle toes. It's not manly!
Katara: You're the one whose bag matches his belt.
Toph: How did you find me?
Aang: (airbending himself to his feet) Well, a crazy king told me I had to find an earthbender who listens to the earth. And then I had a vision in a magic swamp and...
Katara: (cutting Aang off) What Aang is trying to say is, he's the Avatar, and if he doesn't master earthbending soon he won't be able to defeat the Fire Lord.

(The Bandit sticks her open hand in Katara's face, who looks taken aback.)

Toph: Not my problem. Now get out of here or I'll call the guards.
Sokka: Look, we all have to do our part to win this war. And yours is to teach Aang earthbending.

(Cut to a shot of the Bandit's back as Sokka speaks. When he concludes, she turns around, looking distraught.)

Toph: Guards! Guards, help!

(The camera rapidly zooms to a wide, overhead shot as the kids run around and finally exit the frame. Two guards approach as they exit. The Bandit rearranges her hair slightly as the come up to her.)

Guard: Toph, what happened?
Toph: I thought I heard someone. I got scared.
Guard: You know your father doesn't want you wandering the grounds without supervision, Toph.

(Cut to a shot from behind Aang's head. He rests atop the wall or a nearby roof and watches the guards escort Toph away. Cut to a frontal shot were he looks miffed and strums his fingers on the roof. Then his face breaks into a cunning smile as he gets an idea. He disappears.

Fade quickly to a shot of a teapot being picked up by a pair of arms that belong to someone in a brown or gold robe. The fingers have two gold rings on them. The camera follows the teapot as it is lifted up and opened. A smiling man with black hair, Toph's father Lao, opens the teapots and takes a deep breath. He takes a drink before speaking.)

Lao: I'm pleased to hear that Toph's (cut to a wide shot of Lao seated with his wife on his left. They are obviously rich and his wife wears white makeup on her face) private lessons are going well, but I want to be sure that she's not trying anything too dangerous.

(Cut to a profile shot of Mast Yu, Toph seated in the background.)

Yu: Absolutely not. I'm keeping her at the beginner's level. Basic forms and breathing exercises only.
Lao: Very good.

(A servant in gray enters from behind a curtain.)

Servant: Excuse me sir, but you have a visitor.
Lao: (angry) Who thinks they are so important they can just come to my home unannounced?
Servant: Uh, the Avatar, sir.

(Toph raises her head slightly at the mention of the Avatar. She blows a stray strand of hair away from her face, looking none too pleased.

Fade to an overhead shot of a western style dinner table. A variety of food has been placed upon it. Aang, Katara and Sokka sit along one side, Toph, Mrs. Bei Fong, and Master Yu sit along the other. Lao is at the head of the table. Sokka eats like a pig.

A servant places a hot dish in front of Toph.)

Lao: Blow on it. It's too hot for her.
Aang: Allow me.

(Aang creates a small whirlwind which zooms across the table and peter's out over her dish, cooling it. Everyone claps.)

Yu: Oh my!

(Cut to a frontal shot of Mrs. Bei Fong.)

Mrs. Bei Fong: Avatar Aang, it's an honor to have you visit us.
Lao: In your opinion, how much longer do you think the war will last?
Aang: I'd like to defeat the Fire Lord by the end of summer, but (looking suggestively over at Toph) I can't do that (cut to a close up of Toph's unhappy face) without finding an earthbending teacher first.
Lao: Well, Master Yu is (camera pans left to show Yu daintily dabbing his mouth with a napkin) the finest teacher in the land. He's been teaching Toph since she was little.
Aang: Then she must be a great earthbender, (cut to a view of Toph's feet, Aang continues in voice over) probably good enough to teach someone else.

(Toph earthbends a shock wave at Aang underneath the table. He hops up in his seat in pain and surprise.)

Aang: Ow!

(He looks at her angrily. Cut to Toph, who smiles and puts some food in her mouth with her chopsticks.)

Yu: Toph is still learning the basics.
Lao: Yes, and sadly because of her blindness, I don't think she will ever become a true master.

(The kids look at each other, then Aang responds.)

Aang: Oh, I'm sure she's better than you think she is.

(Toph looks annoyed and sends another shock wave at Aang. It knocks his chair backwards sending his face into the bowl in front of him. He rights himself, the bowl still stuck to his face. The Water Tribe siblings look horrified, as does Lao. Toph smiles and takes another bite. Aang smacks his face in frustration, then smiles before his face contorts as a sneeze develops. He sneezes, sending a wind across the table that sends food all over the place. Master Yu, Mrs. Bei Fong and Toph are covered. Toph gets up in anger after the bowl that had covered face fell off.)

Toph: What's your problem?
Aang: What's your problem?

(Cut to a wide shot of Aang and Toph glaring at each other across the table, Lao in between looking uncomfortable. Cut to a brief shot of Katara and Sokka, then back to Yu and Toph's mother. She smiles as she and Yu wipe themselves off.)

Mrs. Bei Fong: Well, shall we move to the living room for dessert then?

(Fade to a night shot of Toph's villa, then cut to a shot of a large room. Sokka is lying on his side and Katara sits on a green bed or couch on the left of the shot. Aang stands in front of a large window where Appa's face can be seen. Aang waves at Appa.)

Aang: Good night, buddy.

(Cut to a shot of the threshold of the door into the room. Toph's barefoot leg enters the frame. Aang turns around, yelps in surprise, and assumes an airbending stance. Cut to a wide shot of the room. Toph stands with her back to the door frame, Aang near the window on the right, and Sokka and Katara on the couch in the middle.)

Toph: Relax. Look, I'm sorry about dinner. Let's call a truce, ok?

(Cut to a frontal shot of Aang, who relaxes his stance. Shift to an outdoor scene that same night. Toph and Aang walk over a bridge over a small brook. Aang walks on the bridge, Toph along the guardrail. The full moon lights the scene.)

Toph: Even though I was born blind, I've never had a problem seeing.

(They reach the end of the bridge and she jumps off the guardrail and lands on the ground.)

Toph: I see with earthbending. It's kind of like seeing with my feet. I can feel the vibrations in the earth, and I can see where everything is. You, that tree, even those ants.

(The screen zooms backward three times as Toph speaks, each time showing a wider overhead shot of the pair. At the mention of the ants, cut to a shot from ground level showing Aang and Toph in the background. In the foreground, some ants are silhouetted waling across over a mound of dirt. Aang looks around, but is unable to see that ants that Toph is talking about. He finally turns to her with a smile.)

Aang: That's amazing.
Toph: (frustrated) My parents don't understand. They've always treated me like I was helpless.
Aang: Is that why you became The Blind Bandit?
Toph: Yeah.
Aang: Then why stay here where you're not happy?
Toph: They're my parents. Where else am I supposed to go?
Aang: (pause, then with a smile) You could come with us.
Toph: Yeah. You guys get to go wherever you want. No one telling you what to do, that's the life. It's just not my life.

(The camera slowly zooms in on Toph as she speaks. When she concludes, her head turns suddenly as she senses something amiss. She drops to her knees and places a hand on the ground.)

Toph: We're being ambushed.

(Cut to a wide, overhead shot. Toph grabs Aang's arm and begins to run. Cut to a closer shot of the pair in headlong flight, Aang looking over uncertainly at the blind girl as they run.

Behind them, something tunneling just under the ground moves rapidly in pursuit. Cut to an overhead shot as the gopher trail of their pursuer passes them and turns around to appear in front of them. The gopher man contestant from the tournament bursts from the ground and challenges them. Cut to a shot from behind the gopher man showing Aang and Toph in combat stances.

Aang and Toph look up just as two metal cases drop on top of them. Each has a window with metal bars for their faces. Cut to a wide shot of the scene. The rest of the Earthbending Tournament contestants and Shin Fu drop from the top of the wall into the garden. The Hippo lands atop the two metal cases and stomps on them a few times. Cut to a pan right shot of Aang and Toph in their cases before cutting to shot of Xin Fu and his gang.)

Xin Fu: (in a sinister tone) I think you kids owe me some money.

(Cut to black for commercial break.)



Act III

(The show returns to an overhead shot of Katara, Sokka, Master Yu and Toph's parents in the garden that same night. They stand around the impressions made in the ground by the metal cases used to trap the Avatar and the Blind Bandit.

Cut to a shot of a sword stuck in the earth. It is pinning a scroll to the ground. Sokka picks up the sword and the scroll with it. He offers it to Katara by holding the end of the sword out to her.)

Sokka: Whoever took Aang and Toph left this.

(Katara takes the offered scroll. Cut to a shot of the open scroll as Katara reads aloud.)

Katara: (voice over) "If you want to see your daughter again, bring (cut to a pan right of Toph's parents and Yu) 500 gold pieces to the arena." (cut to a shot of Katara and Sokka, the open scroll still in her hand) It's signed "Xin Fu and The Boulder."
Sokka: (somberly) I can't believe it.

(Sokka suddenly grabs the scroll, runs a few feet and drops to his knees. Katara and the others are visible in the background watching his antics. Sokka holds the scroll up over his head.)

Sokka: (screaming) I have the Boulder's autograph!

(Cut to a frontal shot of Katara looking both slightly annoyed and confused. Lao turns to Yu in the background.)

Lao: Master Yu, I need you to help you get my daughter back.
Katara: (turning to address Lao) We're going with you.

(Cut to Mrs. Bei Fong, who kneels in between the impressions in the ground. She clasps her hands in front of her in worry.)

Mrs. Bei Fong: Poor Toph. She must be so scared.

(Shift to a shot of Toph in her metal case, her hands on the bars of the window. She looks angry.)

Toph: You think you're so tough...

(The camera zooms back to show her case and Aang's suspended from chains. She points somewhere below her.)

Toph: ...why don't you come up here so I can smack that grin off your face?

(Cut to Xin Fu and The Boulder looking from below them on the floor of the arena.)

Xin Fu: I'm not smiling.

(A voice rings out from behind Xin Fu. It is her father.)

Lao: Toph!

(Xin Fu turns around to see Katara, Sokka, Lao and Yu at the other end of the arena. Sokka holds up a green bag.)

Sokka: Here's your money. Now let them go.

(He drops the bag and Yu kicks it over to Xin Fu with an earthbending move. Xin Fu picks up the bag, opens it and confirms its contents. He turns around and gives a signal to someone off screen. Cut to a shot from behind the suspended cases looking down into the arena. The one on the right begins to drop as the sounds of wheels and gears are heard from off camera.

The case stops a few feet above the ground. The bottom opens and Toph falls out. She runs over to her father. He puts his hand on her shoulder and guides her away, Master Yu in tow. Katara and Sokka watch them leave, then turn to look o.c. towards Shin Fu and the others.)

Katara: What about Aang?

(Cut back to Shin Fu. He holds up a scroll. It unrolls to reveal a wanted picture of Aang.)

Xin Fu: I think the Fire Nation will pay a hefty price for the Avatar. (cut to a close up of his face) Now, get out of my ring.

(Shift back to Aang and Katara who look quickly to their left. A series of vignettes follows showcasing each of the contestants form the tournament. The first is a whirlwind approaching the camera. It stops and dissipates to reveal Fire Nation Man. Cut again show the man in the green mask who drops to the floor of the arena, ready for action. Shift to a shot of an empty portion of the arena. A huge foot crashes down, then the camera zooms back to reveal the Hippo holding a huge. He crushes it in his hands. Cut to a streak of rock and dust as the man with the painted face lands in the arena and rushes at the camera. Finally, cut to a wide shot of the whole crew, from left, the painted face man, Xin Fu, Fire Nation Man, the green mask man, the Hippo and The Boulder. Lastly, the gopher man erupts from the arena floor in front of Xin Fu.

A brief shot of Katara and Sokka looking disconcerted is replaced by a shot of Aang suspended in his metal case. He waves them off.)

Aang: Go. I'll be ok.

(Cut to a wide shot of the scene from behind Katara and Sokka. The kids back away. Cut to a shot of Toph, Lao and Yu walking down the tunnel out of the arena. Katara and Sokka appear at the exit behind them.)

Katara: Toph, there's too many of them. We need an earthbender. We need you!

(Toph, Lao and Yu turn to look backwards, then cut to a shot of Lao.)

Lao: (angry) My daughter is blind. (camera pans down and to the left to reveal Toph, holding her father's hand) She is blind and tiny and helpless and fragile. (Toph closes her eyes) She cannot help you.

(Toph snaps her hand back from her father's.)

Toph: Yes, I can.

(Toph begins to walk down to the others. Cut back briefly to her father looking distraught at her daughter's decision, then cut to a wide, long shot of Xin Fu and his supporters walking off the arena at the other end. The Hippo supports Aang's metal case on his shoulder. Suddenly a huge, jagged rock erupts from the earth in front of them blocking their path. Cut to a shot from behind them. They all turn around, then cut to a shot of Toph, Aang and Katara.)

Toph: (pointing at the camera) Let him go. I beat you all before, (making a sweeping motion with her hand) and I'll do it again.

(Cut back to Fire Nation Man, the Hippo and The Boulder.)

Boulder: (pointing o.c. at the kids) The Boulder takes issue with that comment.

(The Hippo throws Aang's metal case across the arena floor, then cut to a close shot of the kids. Sokka and Katara move up from behind Toph, but are prevented as the blind girl fans out her arms, blocking them.)

Toph: Wait.

(Cut to the tournament contestants rushing ahead, then back to a close shot of Toph's eyes. This shot is replaced a moment later from behind Toph's head as she watches the line of opponents rush forward.)

Toph: (turning her head left and looking o.c.) They're mine.

(Cut to a shot of Katara and Sokka with surprised looks on their faces. They look at each for a moment before a cut to Toph's foot stomping the ground. A quick close up shot of her face is replaced by a wider view of her struggling to raise up her arms in an earthbending move. Cut to a pan right shot of the contestants running at her with an effect in the background indicating high speed.

Toph waits a few more moments then stomps the ground causing an explosion of rock and dust. The entire group of opponents is blow backwards in an enormous debris cloud. Cut to a shot from the back of the arena as the expanding shell of debris rushes toward then covers the camera. The Boulder falls out of the dust cloud and hits the floor with a grunt. Cut to a wider shot of the kids and the dust cloud, which Toph enters. The shot zooms backward to show the backs of Yu and Lao in the stands. A quick frontal shot shows their anxious faces.

Cut to a shot of a red shoe with gold fringe amidst the dust cloud, then cut to Fire Nation Man assuming various martial poses in the cloud, looking for his opponent. The dust clears to reveal Toph in front of him. He notices and reacts with surprise, but recovers. A close up of his foot moving slowly forward is replaced by a shot of a small smile slowly emerging on Toph's face.

A shot from ground level between Toph's legs in slow motion show Fire Nation Man raising a stream of earth from the ground next to him. As he shoots the stream, Toph moves right. The stream of dirt passes her as she steps out of the way. She simultaneously launches her own attack, causing a series of rocks to burst forth from the floor that rapidly approaches her opponent. The last rocks blast Fire Nation Man out of the ring.

A quick view of Yu and Lao looking down where Fire Nation Man fell is replaced by a shot of Fire Nation Man's legs and rump atop a pile of rubble at the base of the arena. He groans.

Cut to Katara and Sokka trying to open Aang's case. Sokka hammers at the lock on the front with a rock, while Katara tries to open the bottom with his hands.)

Aang: Hit it harder!
Sokka: I'm trying!

(Cut to the green masked man walking on all fours through the dust cloud. A pebble hits the back of his head and he turns to see Toph silhouetted in the dust cloud. A close reveals her setting up for her next move, that tiny smile still on her face. Cut back to the green mask man, who jumps into the air with two spherical rocks in his hands. He throws them simultaneously. Cut to the rocks p.o.v. as they speed towards her. She blocks them in mid air and they crash begin her in unison.

As the green masked man falls back to the ground, Toph strikes the ground several times with her foot. As she does, a thin pillar of rock erupts from the ground, hitting her opponent in the stomach. He bounces from pillar to pillar, until the last bounce ejects him from the arena. He hits Fire Nation Man as he lands.

Cut back to Toph as the gopher man erupts form the floor behind her. The frame rate slows as the rock he slows at her slowly approaches the back of her neck. The frame speeds up as she catches it and throws it back at him. It hits him and he is knocked right through the floor and right into Fire Nation Man and the green mask man.

Sokka slams his rock into the metal case one more time, breaking the lock. The bottom of the case opens up and Aang emerges, ready for combat. Sokka shakes his head and points o.c. Aang drops his combat stance and follows Sokka's finger.

Cut to a shot behind Sokka and Aang. The Hippo runs out of the dusk cloud swinging one of the Earth Kingdom stone circles with the square center. He stops as The Boulder gets flung out of the cloud and lands beside the Hippo. He gets up as Toph emerges from the cloud. She now stands on the large stone circle that dominates the center of the arena. She moves forward with her arms bent at the elbows, her hands help up in front of her.

The Boulder makes some intimidating noises and the Hippo beats his chest as she advances. Cut to a quick shot of Lao, his eyes wide in terror.

A quick shot of Toph's left ear shows it wiggle slightly in reaction to some noise. The camera zooms back to show her on the stone circle. As the Hippo and The Boulder begin to rush her the painted face man swings in front of the camera towards his target below.

Toph makes several jerky motions and the whole stone circle begins to turn. The painted man swings back into the picture and slams into the Hippo and The Boulder just as they are about to strike her.

Cut to the three tournament contestants groaning in a heap in front of her. The scene is still heavily obscured by a dust cloud from the fighting. A close up of Toph's face shows the slight smile, before a wider shot showing her executing some powerful bending moves. The background as she makes these moves is an animation effect indicating intense power. The three opponents are ejected from the ring and crash into their compatriots below.

Shift to Yu and Lao in the stands. Lao looks down at the arena o.c. with great concern as he holds his chin in his hand.)

Yu: (shocked) I never knew. Your daughter's amazing.

(Cut back to a wide shot from the back of the arena. Toph stands in front of the sizeable dust cloud, the others on the side of the arena to her right. She makes one swift motion and the cloud is blown away to reveal a single opponent left, Xin Fu.

A close up of Xin Fu shows him cracking his neck in preparation for the duel. He takes up a bending stance, then cut to Toph who spits o.c. A quick shot of her father and Yu is replaced by an overhead shot of the two circling around each other. Several shots of their eyes go by before Xin Fu starts the battle. In quick succession he launches a single boulder, a double, a single, a triple and a final single rock at her.

Just before the first of the rocks hits, she raises two triangular sheets of rock in front of her as a shield. The rocks bounce of her shield. After the last one strikes, she launches one of the two shields at her opponent. It misses as he launches himself into the air to avoid it. As he spins in mid air, the frame rate slows down dramatically. His hand begins to delve into the earth beneath him as he spins. When his hand makes contact, the screen goes black and white. The concentric white circles fan out from the point of contact towards Toph where it soon reaches her leg.

The screen returns to normal color and the frame rate returns to normal speed. He scoops a chunk of earth out of the floor of the arena and throws it at her. She dodges and it passes by her face. The frame rate slows again as the camera cuts to a close up of her eyes as the rock and little pebbles blow by close to her face. Her expression is impassive. The frame rate accelerates again as she returns fire. Cut to an expression of terror on Xin Fu's face. He is blasted out of the ring and lands in between Lao and Yu in the stands. He falls into the pit below.

Cut to a shot of Aang, Sokka and Katara. The latter two smile, Sokka's mouth hangs wide open and he faints. Cut back to Yu and Lao.)

Yu: She's the greatest earthbender I've ever seen!

(Fade to a quick night shot of Toph's home, then to a profile shot of Toph standing in front of her seated mother and father, once again in her fancy dress. Aang and the others are seated behind her.)

Toph: Dad, I know it's hard for you to see me this way, but the obedient little helpless blind girl that you think I am just isn't me. I love fighting. I love being an earthbender. And I'm really, really good at it. I know I've kept my life secret from you, but you were keeping me secret from the whole world. You were doing it to protect me. But I'm twelve years old and I've never had a real friend. So now that you see who I really am, I hope it doesn't change the way you feel about me.
Lao: Of course it doesn't change the way I feel about you, Toph. It's made me realize something.
Toph: (hopeful) It has?
Lao: Yes. I've let you have far too much freedom. From now on, you will be cared for and guarded 24 hours a day.
Toph: But dad!
Mrs. Bei Fong: We are doing this for your own good, Toph.

(Cut to a shot from the back of the reception room from behind Aang, Sokka and Katara. Lao stands to give instructions to the guards.)

Lao: Please escort the Avatar and his friends out. (he points his right o.c.) They are no longer welcome here.

(Cut to Aang being marched out. He turns his head around.)

Aang: I'm sorry, Toph.
Toph: I'm sorry, too. Goodbye, Aang.

(A close up of Toph's face reveals a tear streaking down and dripping off her chin.

Cut to a wide, over head night shot of Appa and the kids. Appa grunts. Aang and Katara walk over to the lip of a small cliff in front of them.)

Katara: Don't worry. We'll find you a teacher. (cut to a profile shot of the two, the air blows Katara's braids) There are plenty of amazing earthbenders out there.

(Cut to a wider shot from behind them. The full moon shines in the distance.)

Aang: Not like her.

(Shift to a close up of Sokka wearing Toph's tournament belt. He cleans it and it makes squeaking noises as he does so. Cut back to Katara and Aang walking over to Appa. They walk on his tail and Appa lifts them up to his back.

Cut to a shot of the bushes behind them. Toph runs through them, breathing heavily. Aang's turns to see her with a look of wonder.)

Aang: Toph! What are you doing here?
Toph: My dad changed his mind. He said I was free to travel the world.
Sokka: (he and Katara look at each quickly) Well, we'd better get out of here - before your dad changes his mind again.
Toph: Good idea.
Aang: You're gonna be a great teacher, Toph.
Toph: (slyly) Speaking of which, I want to show you something.
Aang: Okay.

(Aang airbends himself out of Appa's driver's seat. As he lands in front of Toph, she taps the ground with her foot and a rock erupts from the ground, throwing Aang out of the frame. Cut to a shot from the branches of a nearby tree. Aang hangs from one of them by his feet.)

Toph: Now we're even.

(Cut to a shot from Sokka's p.o.v. looking down at Toph. She extends her hand up towards him.)

Toph: Um, I'll take the belt back.

(Sokka unhooks the belt and drops it on her. It hits on the head with a sound effect and lays her out flat in a heap.)

Toph: Ow!
Sokka: Sorry.

(Cut to a wide shot Appa and Toph still laid out flat. In the foreground Aang falls out of tree and lands in a heap himself.

Shift scenes to Lao's house. Xin Fu and Yu stand next to each other facing the camera.)

Lao: I know you two are very different...

(Cut to a shot behind Xin Fu and Yu. Lao enters the frame and puts a box he is carrying on the table in front of them.)

Lao: ...but I believe you have a common interest.

(He opens the box to reveal gold coins. Xin Fu looks at them with great, Master Yu with astonishment. A shot of the right half of Xin Fu's face shows his eye sliding over to Yu. A shot of the left half of Yu's face shows the same. Cut to Lao on his seat.)

Lao: The Avatar has kidnapped my daughter. I want you to do whatever it takes to bring her back home.

(Both bow, then fade to Toph in Appa's saddle looking back from where they had come. She looks content and closes her eyes. Cut to a wide shot as Appa grunts and flies away from the camera. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Episode opens with a shot of the sun setting over a range of hills that have trees and a creek spread out before it. The camera tilts down to show Appa and the gang, now including Toph, sitting in what looks like a dried up section the creek. There is a bunch of white fur around Appa's feet. Cut to a shot of Appa from his right side at an angle so his back is closest and his head is furthest. Aang sits in the basket and is passing a sleeping bag down to Sokka. Katara walks around Appa's head to the same side. Toph appears from the left and is closest to the camera.)

Toph: Hey, you guys picked a great campsite. (cut to a shot of Toph's feet in the pile of white fur) The grass is so soft.

(Cut to a shot that shows the full of Appa from his right side showing all four of them.)

Sokka: That's not grass. Appa's shedding.
Katara: (Lifting her right foot out of the fur and balancing on her left) Oh, gross!
Aang: That's not gross; it's just a part of spring.

(Shot cuts to Aang atop Appa as a light melodious tone plays softly. A blue bird lands gracefully on his head and a yellow butterfly flutters by his right ear which Momo jumps up in an attempt to snatch.)

Aang: You know, rebirth, flowers blooming, and Appa gets a new coat!

(Cut to a shot of Appa's head, Katara stands to its left.)

Katara: Ah, the beauty of spring. (Appa, who sticks his tongue out to reveal it's covered in fur, sneezes, blowing fur everywhere.) Stop, Appa, stop!

(She coughs, and waves her arms to stop Appa from covering her in hair even more. Shot pans over to Sokka who is kneeling and rubbing fur on his head.)

Sokka: It's not that bad, Katara. (He stands to reveal he has piled the fur on his head to form a tall pillar of hair in a very Marge Simpson like fashion.) It makes a great wig!
Aang: (Dropping into the shot from atop Appa, he has arranged the fur on his face to form a large mustache and beard.) And a great beard!

(Sokka and Aang point and laugh at each other. Shot changes to Katara who is not smiling and begins to whip the fur off her sleeve.)

Katara: (unamused) I'm just glad we finally have another girl in the group because you two are disgusting.

(Cut back to Aang and Sokka who are both slightly hunched with one arm over the other's shoulder.)

Toph: Excuse me, (She walks in between the two breaking them apar.) does anyone have a razor... (She lifts both arms to reveal a mass of white fur emerging out of both of her sleeves, under her arms) ...because I've got some hairy pits!

(All three of them laugh until Aang gives one of his powerful airbending sneezes, thrusting him backwards into Appa's leg and then falling face down on the ground. He lifts his head to reveal his beard and mustache are gone but he now has a large mass of fur sticking jaggedly up on his back. All three begin laughing again. Cut to Katara who at first looks disgusted, but quickly joins in the laughter.

Fade into a shot of the same setting at night where Aang, Sokka, and Katara are setting up camp. Sokka is carrying some firewood, Aang, with a blast of air, sets up the tent, and Katara is swirling some water in a large pot. They all eventually stop and look o.c. Shot cuts to show Toph laying lazily against a rock with her legs crossed, arms behind her head, and a piece of straw casually hanging from her mouth. Cut back to a close up of Katara at her pot who looks slightly annoyed and stands up. Shot changes to a view from behind Toph's head. Katara enters the shot in front of Toph.)

Katara: So, Toph, usually when setting up camp we try to divide up the work.
Toph: (Cut to her lying down) Hey, don't worry about me, I'm good to go.
Katara: (Cut back to her, Aang and Sokka can be seen working again in the background) Well, actually, what I'm trying to say is, uh, some of us might fetch water while someone else might set up the fire pit or put up the tent. (Momo flies down dropping nuts into Katara's hand and flutters by her head.) Even Momo does his fair share.
Toph: (Cut back to her as she takes the straw from her mouth) Katara, I'm fine. I can carry my own weight. I don't need a fire, I've already collected my own food, and look, (Now sitting upright, she uses her earthbending to create a stone tent.) my tent's all set up.
Katara: (Cut back to her, as she becomes steadily more annoyed) Well, that's great for you, but we still need to finish...

(Cut to a shot of the both of them from the side, Toph sitting just outside her stone tent.)

Toph: (Irritated) I don't understand. What's the problem here?
Katara: Never mind.

(She walks away as Toph earthbends herself back into her tent. Fade in to Sokka and Aang setting up camp apparently a little time later. Aang stands on Appa's head while Sokka stands on the ground. Using airbending, Aang lifts Appa's basket off his back and attempts to lower it down to Sokka, but accidentally drops it on top of him.)

Sokka: Aaaah!
Aang: (Leaping down to lift the basket off him.) Sorry!

(Shot cuts to Katara who places down her pot of water and looks over to Toph by her stone tent. Cut to Katara's face who smiles slightly before the shot changes to Toph eating something in front of her tent while Katara walks over to her.)

Katara: Hey Toph, I wanted to apologize for earlier. I think we're all just a little tired and getting on each others' nerves.
Toph: Yeah, you do seem pretty tired.

(Cut to Katara's aggravated face.)

Katara: (angrily) I meant all of us.

(Cut to a shot from insider Toph's tent showing her back and Katara standing outside it.)

Toph: Well, goodnight.

(She turns around and lays done on her chest inside.)

Katara: (half-heartedly) Goodnight.

(She walks away o.c.. Fade to a night scene. Aang is sleeping on Appa's front right arm, Momo is curled up on Appa's head, Sokka and Katara are sleeping inside their tent, and Toph is across the camp asleep in her tent. Cut to a shot of Toph asleep in her tent. Quite suddenly she awakes and gasps, rising to her knees and feeling the ground with her hand. Cut to a shot of her hand as she feels, then cut to her right ear as she listens carefully. Shot cuts back to her inside the tent as she rises, turns, and runs out.)

Toph: There's something coming toward us!

(Cut to a shot of Appa and the tent. Aang wakes and looks up, Momo does the same. Katara and Sokka emerge from their tent.)

Aang: What is it?

(Cut to Toph standing in the middle of the camp, she kneels to the ground again to feel it.)

Toph: It feels like an avalanche... (Aang, Katara, and Sokka all enter the shot and stand behind her) But also not like an avalanche.
Sokka: Your powers of perception are frightening.
Katara: Should we leave?
Aang: Better safe than sorry.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the tree line where, just beyond it, something is moving rapidly in their direction across an open area of ground, kicking up a large cloud of dust in its wake. Appa flies up into the shot from below. Cut to a shot of Aang sitting on Appa's head. He turns around and squints his eyes to see their pursuer. Cut to a shot of the saddle where Sokka Katara and Toph are riding. We see all four of them looking back beyond.)

Katara: What is that thing?

(Cut to a shot of the thing chasing them. It's a large train-like tank with smoke pouring out of it's smokestack. It has two large compartments connected to it, trailing behind. All have large treads. The machine is moving very quickly for its size.

Cut to shot of the moon in the cloudy sky, partially blocked by them. Appa flies into the shot from the left and flies through. It is later that night. Shot cuts to Aang holding Appa's reigns. He now has bags under his eyes and yawns deeply. Cut to Sokka who is using his right arm to support his head. Cut to the back end of the saddle, we see Toph holding the side of it while Katara sits in the middle. They both are trying to stay awake. Cut back to Appa flying through the sky over a range of hills below.

Fade to Appa descending onto one of the hills a little bit later. Once all six paws are on the ground, Toph jumps out of the saddle and lays flat on the ground. The other three climb out as well.)

Toph: Ahh, land, sweet land! (Using earthbending to propel herself to her feet and slinging her bag over her shoulder.) See you guys in the morning!
Katara: Actually, can you help us unload?
Toph: (Cut to her looking back.) Really? You need me to help unload Sokka's funky-smelling sleeping bag?

(Cut to Katara and Sokka standing beside Appa. Aang, of screen, hands down Sokka's sleeping bag to him. He takes a few sniffs, twitches in disgust making a matching facial expression, and falls backward.)

Katara: Well, yeah. (Cut to Toph while Katara approaches her from the right) That and everything else. You're a part of our team now and...
Toph: (Irritated) Look. (Pointing at Katara) I didn't ask you to help unload my stuff. I'm carrying my own weight.

(Toph walks left off screen.)

Katara: (Hand on her hips.) That's not the point.

(The camera cuts to and follows Katara from her right as she walks from left to right approaching Toph. When she reaches her it stops at a side view of both of them.)

Katara: Ever since joining us you've been nothing but selfish and unhelpful.
Toph: What? (Doing a half turn and pointing at Katara again.) Look here, sugar queen, (Drops arm and continues, Katara makes a gesture like she wants to interject.) I gave up everything I had so that I could teach Aang earthbending, so don't you talk to me about being selfish!

(Camera backs away slightly to show Toph sitting quickly and making another stone tent around herself.)

Katara: Sugar Queen! (Toph closes off her rock tent by brining a slab of earth up to cover the opening to Katara.) D-Did you just slam the door in my face!

(Shot cuts to show the tent from the front farther away with Katara moving erratically about it grumbling. Closer, we see the back of Sokka, Aang, and Momo as they watch on.)

Katara: How can you be so infuriating!

(She continues to grumble while the others speak.)

Aang: (Hesitant) Should we... do something?
Sokka: Hey, I'm just enjoying the show.

(Cut to Katara pounding on the "door" of the tent as Aang walks up to her from the left.)

Aang: Okay, okay, you both need to calm down.
Katara: (Cut to the back of her head) Both? (Shouting, turning quickly to show a hysterical face.) I'm completely calm!

(Cut to a view just over Katara's shoulder of Aang standing very still and erect. He begins to back slowly o.c. as he replies)

Aang: I... can see that.

(Cut to a shot of the nighttime sky through the trees. Then cut to Aang Sokka and Katara lying on the ground, the latter two in sleeping bags. Katara stares awake at the sky.)

Katara: The stars sure are beautiful tonight.

(Sokka next to her wakes up aggravated and covers his head in his bag to drown out the noise.)

Katara: Too bad you can't see them, Toph!

(Cut to a shot of Toph's tent. We hear a grunt and see a rumble of earth emerge from her tent and crawl quickly across the ground, the camera follows it, as it strikes Katara's sleeping bag causing it to fly upwards and land on top of Sokka. Cut to a closer shot of Sokka, who flips his sister off him.)

Sokka: Hey, how is a guy supposed to sleep with all this yelling and earthquaking!

(Cut to front of Toph's stone tent as she brings the "door" down and emerges, placing her hand on the ground.)

Toph: That thing is back!

(Cut back to the Aang, Katara, and Sokka all sitting up and looking off screen at Toph.)

Sokka: Well, how far away is it? (Covering his head again, muffling his voice slightly) Maybe we can close our eyes just for a few minutes.

(Shot pans up over the tree to see the smoke from the machine's stack in the distance.)

Aang: (urgently in voice over) I don't think so, Sokka.

(Cut to Appa flying over trees and hills again, away from the smoke cloud. Cut to a close up of the machine from the side as it moves powerfully and swiftly across the terrain. Cut to a shot of the rear of Appa's saddle, where Toph and Katara lay over the piles of strapped down supplies and equipment.)

Katara: Seriously, what is that thing?
Toph: And how does it keep finding us?

(Cut to the front of the saddle, Aang leans over front lip of it while Sokka is asleep and snoring in it.)

Aang: I don't know, but this time I'm going to make sure we lose 'em.

(Cut to various shots of Appa flying over the hills again. Finally, the last shot is of Appa landing on a large circular patch of land on a hill. When he does, he falls over on his side spilling out the company in his saddle. Aang, Katara, and Toph simply stay lying where they fell. Sokka pulls out his sleeping bag and stuffs himself in it. )

Sokka: Okay, forget about setting up camp. I'm finding the softest pile of dirt and going to sleep.
Katara: (Cut to her as she pulls a bag close to lay her head on it) That's good, because Toph wasn't going to help anyway.
Toph: (Cut to her laying face up with her head on her bag.) Oh, I didn't realize baby still needed someone to tuck her in bed.
Aang: (Cut to an over head shot of Aang, Katara, and Toph all lying down.) Come on guys, there's something after us and we don't even know what (covers his head with the top of his shirt, muffling his voice) or who it is.
Katara: It could be Zuko. We haven't seen him since the North Pole.
Toph: Who's Zuko?
Sokka: (Cut to him in his bag from the front, his head perched up on the ground.) Oh, just some angry freak with a ponytail who's tracked us all over the world.

(Sokka puts his head face down in the dirt.)

Katara: (jokingly) What's wrong with ponytails, ponytail?
Sokka: (gesturing to his hair, speaking in a muffled voice) This is a warrior's wolf tail.
Katara: Well, it certainly tells the other warriors that you're fun and perky!

(Cut to a far shot of the group and Appa all lying down.)

Sokka: Anyway, whoever's chasing us, they couldn't have followed us here. So... now would everyone just (cut to him with finger to mouth) shhh!

(Sokka lies down as Momo jumps on him and chirps.) No, Momo, ssh! Sleepy time.

(Momo jumps off Sokka and continues to chirp. Shot cuts to him jumping around moving away from the group, his ears twitching. Cut back to the group, Aang standing. Sokka lays his head down again, muffling his voice.)

Sokka: Aww, don't tell me...

(Toph and Katara get up.)

Aang: That's impossible. There's no way they could have tracked us.
Toph: I can feel it with my own two feet!

(Aang runs to the right o.c.. Shot cuts to him standing beside Momo on the ledge to get a better look. Camera pans up to show the cloud of smoke, once again, approaching from the distance. Cut to close up of the machine as it crawls over a hill and continues to approach. Cut back to the ledge where, from left to right, Aang, Katara, Sokka, and Toph look down on their pursuer.)

Katara: Let's get out of here!
Aang: Maybe we should face them. Find out who they are. Who knows, maybe they're friendly.
Sokka: Always the optimist.

(Cut to the machine from the side as it abruptly stops moving. The side of the final compartment opens. White smoke pours out and a ramp descends. In the smoke, three figures are visible. The three figures descend the ramp out of the smoke, the middle one in the lead. They ride giant lizards. Shot cuts to a view of the riders as they file into the shot from the right. First Ty Lee, then Mai, followed finally by Azula. Cut to a close-up of Aang and Katara's stunned faces, the bags in their eyes very visible now. Then cut to a long shot of the hill where the gang stands and it pans down to follow a path down the hill to the bottom where we see the backs of the three girls. Then, cut to a close up of Azula's emotionless face.

Cut to black for commercial break.)



Act II

(Show returns with a shot of the three girls sitting in front of the machine. With a little grunt from their lizard mounts, they move forward. Shot cuts to a view from atop the machine, showing again the path from where it sits up to the area Appa and the gang are camped. Azula, Mai, and Ty Lee ride their creatures up the path at remarkable speed. Cut to an overhead shot of the three riding. Then another shot of the riding girls from the side, Mai closest, Ty Lee farthest. Cut back to Aang, Katara, Sokka, and Toph standing on the ledge looking down at the girls.)

Katara: It's those three girls from Omashu!

(All four assume their own unique battle stances, Sokka having drawn his boomerang.)

Toph: We can take 'em. Three on three.
Sokka: Actually, Toph, there's four of us.

(Cut to side shot of the four, Toph closest, Aang furthest. Sokka looks inquisitively at Toph while remaining in his battle stance.)

Toph: Oh. I'm sorry, I didn't count you. You know, no bending and all.
Sokka: (Dropping his stance and making a furious expression at Toph, while shouting in an equally furious way) I can still fight!
Toph: Okay. Three on three plus Sokka.

(Sokka growls furiously while his face turns red. Shot cuts to a view from behind the group to show the path down the hill again and the three girls proceeding up it quickly. Cut to a view of Toph who jabs her arms and fists in the air three times, while on the third opening her palms. Shot cuts to show the ground under Toph as a large rumble of earth descends down from her position, blasting rock everywhere. Cut to a frontal shot of the mounted girls riding forward quickly. Large rock formations rise from the ground to impede them but they simply ride over each one. Cut back to the ledge. We only see Sokka and Toph.)

Sokka: Well, we wanted to find out who they were. We found out. (Sheathing his boomerang and turning around.) Now let's get out of here.

(Aang, Sokka, and Katara run back o.c. to Appa. Toph, however, does not. She once again assumes an earthbending stance and stomps the ground once. Shot cuts to an overhead shot of the path up the hill. A large wall of earth rises up to block the path. Cut to frontal shot of Azula who moves her right arm under herself while blue electricity sparkles around it then brings her left arm over and across her chest. She releases a blast of lightning which destroys a portion of the wall which the girls ride through to continue their pursuit.

Cut back to side shot of Appa and the gang. Katara, Momo, and Aang are already in the saddle, Sokka is on the ground holding his sleeping bag, Toph remains at the edge of the rock looking in amazement. Cut to a shot of Mai who raises her left arm and releases four arrows from her wrists. Shot cuts to show these heading directly for Toph. A new shot shows her earthbend and cause the ground under her to rise quickly propelling her upward. The arrows hit the rock. Shot cuts to Appa as Toph lands in the basket.)

Aang: Appa, yip yip!

(Appa begins to fly o.c. Cut to Appa flying away from the hill just as a blast of blue fire emerges from the dust cloud Toph's earthbending created. Cut to shot of Azula with her right arm pointing up, her middle and index fingers extended. She lowers her arm and looks on as shot fades into Appa's sleepy face flying through the night. Shot pans up to see the basket where Sokka, Katara, and Toph all lean against various things. Aang is in the "driver's seat" on Appa's head.)

Katara: I can't believe those girls followed us all the way from Omashu.

(Cut to shot of Toph and Katara in the saddle.)

Toph: I still think we could've taken them.
Katara: Are you kidding? The crazy blue firebending and the flying daggers are bad enough, but last time we saw them (Cut to her alone) one of those girls did something that took my bending away. That's scary.

(Cut to shot of Appa flying over hills as the sun rises over the biggest one.)

Sokka: Oh no, the sun is rising! (Cut to shot of the basket, Sokka sitting at the lip of it gesturing to the sun off screen) We've been up all night with no sleep.
Aang: Sokka, we'll be okay.
Sokka: (Speaking desperately, shot cuts to him making erratic arm movements and crazy facial expressions) Are you sure!? I've never not slept before! What if I fall asleep now and something happens? And something always happens!
Katara: (Cut to shot of her and Toph) Every time we land, those girls are there, so we'll just have to keep flying.
Aang: (Cut to Appa flying over the hills with the rising sun in the background) We can't keep flying forever.

(Cut to a shot of two flowers in a grassland. Suddenly, the bottom of the tank train passes through the shot from right to left, the treads ripping the flowers away. We then see a larger shot of the grasslands as the tank passes with incredible speed leaving large tracks. We cut to a close shot of one of these tracks as, just beside it, we see the feet of a very familiar ostrich horse following. Cut to a shot of Zuko who at first has his head bowed but raises it with a look of determination on his face. Shot cuts to an overhead view of the grassland, the tracks from the tank going the whole length. Zuko rides beside the tracks following the cloud of smoke in the distance.

Fade to shot of Appa flying over clouds.)

Aang: (yawns) So, what's the plan?

(Cut to Toph slumped against the rim of Appa's basket, her face visible through one of the holes.)

Toph: Don't know... too tired to think.

(Cut to back of Appa's basket, Katara and Sokka lay against the strapped down pile of bags.)

Katara: I'm sure we'll come up with something after a short nap.
Sokka: Yes! Sleep!

(Suddenly, Katara and Sokka begin to rise as clouds rush by from the bottom of the screen to the top; Appa is falling. Camera pans right to Toph and Momo who are also rising as the bison they we're lying on falls away. Toph clings to the side of the basket, Momo clings to her foot.)

Toph (shouting): What's going on!

(Pan right to Aang who is holding on to the reigns while falling feet higher than Appa.)

Aang: Appa fell asleep!

(Cut to side shot of the falling bison. The kids try desperately to keep from falling away from him; Katara holds her brother's hand as he grips the bags. They all scream loudly. Cut to Sokka holding the bags while Katara holds his hand. Sokka pulls his sister closer to him and she grabs his chest and holds on tight. Shot cuts to Appa's sleeping face as Aang crawls down his forehead to look him in the eyes.)

Aang: Wake up, buddy!

(Shot cuts to an overhead view as the bison plummets to the ground. Cut to one of Appa's eyes as it slowly opens. Another shot shows the bison stop abruptly in its fall at the top of a tree line. Cut to the saddle as the falling kids land on the saddle as it stops falling. They cling to it, but are almost blown out of the saddle as the bison races forward. Shot cuts to Appa crashing through trees as he tries to slow down. Then individual shots of Toph, Sokka and Katara, and Aang as they brace from the branches and limbs that are crashing into them. Shot cuts to birds flying away from the trees, then pans down to show Appa having created a large trench behind him in his crash landing.

Cut to Appa's head lying on the ground, he's fallen asleep again. Aang slides down off the bison's head and walks away slowly.)

Aang: Appa's exhausted.

(Cut to Sokka and Katara walking away from Appa with their sleeping bags.)

Sokka: Okay, we've put a lot of distance between us and them. The plan now is to follow Appa's lead and get some sleep.
Katara: Of course, we could have gotten some sleep earlier (Cut to shot of Toph on her stomach asleep on the ground) if Toph didn't have such issues.
Toph: (Screaming, and springing awake slamming her hands on the ground causing it to break a little) What!?

(Cut to Toph, who stands up, and Aang approaching from the front of Appa's head.)

Aang: Alright, alright! Everyone's exhausted. Let's just get some rest.
Toph: No! I want to hear what Katara has to say. You think I have issues?
Katara: (Cut to her with an annoyed yet sarcastically placid face) I'm just saying, maybe if you helped out earlier we could've set up our camp faster and gotten some sleep and then maybe we wouldn't be in this situation!

(Cut to shot of the whole "camp" area. Sokka is off to the side rolling out his sleeping bag and falling down asleep. Katara and Toph stand next to Appa having a stand-off while Aang stands by Appa's head watching.)

Toph: You're blaming me for this!?

(Cut to Katara who throws down her sleeping bag and waves her hands back and forth in a "bring it on" gesture while Toph, fists clenched, enters the shot advancing on her. Aang zips in between them, trying to stop the fighting.)

Aang: No, no! She's not blaming you!
Katara: No, I'm blaming her!
Toph: Hey!

(With one hand, she throws Aang off screen. Shot cuts to Toph and Katara's faces each glaring at each other.)

Toph: I never asked you for diddly doo da. I carry my own weight!

(Shot cuts to full shot of Appa from behind, Aang sitting on top of him having been thrown there and Toph and Katara beside him.)

Toph: Besides, if there's anyone to blame, it's sheddy over here!
Aang: What? You're blaming Appa?!

(Cut to shot of Toph walking over to Appa's side.)

Toph: Yeah! You wanna know how they keep finding us?

(She grabs a bunch of hair from Appa's side and opens her palm to let it blow away in the breeze.)

Toph: He's leaving a trail everywhere we go!

(Cut to shot of Appa form the side, we see Toph's back and Aang on top of the bison as he jumps down and shouts at her.)

Aang: How dare you blame Appa! He saved your life three times today! If there's anyone to blame, it's you! You're always talking about how you carry your own weight, but you're not! He is! Appa's carrying your weight! (Camera zooms in on him) He never had a problem flying when (cut to Toph from over Aang's shoulder) it was just the three of us!

(Toph stands for a second then walks away off screen. Shot cuts to view of the camp again, Sokka now awake and standing. Toph approaches her bag and kicks the ground causing it to fly up into her arms via earthbending.)

Toph: I'm outta here.

(Cut to shot of Toph from the front as she walks away. Sokka runs in and stands in front of her.)

Sokka: Wait.

(Cut to shot of Sokka standing in front of Toph, arms raised from the side. Toph taps the ground with her feet causing the ground under Sokka to move to the side along with him. She continues to walk away.

Shot cuts to the sky as Appa's hairs drifts down to the ground. As the camera pans low, we see the tank zooming toward it, following the hair.

Shot cuts back to Aang who is raising his arms to the sky, his eyes black and watery.)

Aang: What did I just do!?

(He falls down to sit, shot cuts to side to show him and Katara who is standing.)

Aang: I can't believe I yelled at my earthbending teacher. Now she's gone.
Katara: I know. We're all just trying to get used to each other, and I was so mean to her.
Sokka: (Cut to him drinking from a cup, the other two visible over his shoulder) Yeah, you two were pretty much jerks.
Katara: (Sarcastically) Thanks, Sokka.
Sokka: No problem.
Katara: We need to find Toph and apologize.
Sokka: Okay, but what are we going to do about the tank full of dangerous ladies chasing us?

(Cut to Aang's hand pulling fur off of Appa, then to him opening his palm to let it flutter away in the breeze.)

Aang: I have a plan.

(Fade to Appa sitting in a river being washed. Aang and Katara stand on each of the banks using waterbending to create spouts of water that rise and splash onto the bison's back. Sokka stands next to Appa's head with a scrubbing stick. Shot cuts to stones in the river that the fur has caught on as it flowed down stream. Shot cuts to Momo who has a scrubber on his feet as he flutters down to land on Appa's back and scrub him. The stream of water, however, moves up Appa's back toward him and he quickly flies away to avoid it. Shot cuts to Appa's head which Sokka is scrubbing as Momo flies away. The stream of water instead showers Sokka who groans.

Shot cuts to the sky again and slowly pans down as Aang speaks eventually stopping to show Appa standing next to the river, his fur wet and hanging heavily instead of fluffy.)

Aang: Toph was right. Appa's fur was leaving a trail right to us. But now that he's clean, no more trail!
Katara: Are you sure that he's okay to fly?
Aang: (Cut to him standing next to Appa's wet head) He'll be fine as long as we leave his saddle and all our stuff here. (He moves to a pile of fur and places it into a bag) I'm going to use Appa's fur to make a fake trail and lead the tank off course.

(Cut to the tree line as Appa grunts and takes off. He doesn't manage to clear the closest trees and hits them, causing their tops to beak off and crash below. Aang walks into the shot watching him fly away, then turns around and walks. Shot cuts to show Aang running and taking off on his glider while white furs drops from him.

Shot cuts to a view of mountains and pans down to reveal Toph walking along between rocks and trees. When the shot cuts to show her again from the side, she halts. Cut to a shot of her feet to acknowledge she feels a vibration in the earth. Her feet then turn to the left. Cut to her face as the camera revolves slightly around her head. She takes a breath as the shot cuts to her in full as she earthbends quickly, causing a rumble of earth to jet across the ground to her left. Shot cuts to show the rumble hit a rock and cause a huge dust cloud to emerge behind it. A loud grunt is herd. Shot cuts to show, behind the rock, Iroh lying on the ground massaging his behind. Cut to view of Iroh on the ground from the front, his hair and beard are no longer nice and tidy, but long, shaggy, and unkempt. Toph stands in a stance on the rock behind him.)

Iroh: Ohhh... That really hurt my tailbone.

(Cut to the river and rocks again, the fur is still clinging to the rocks. A long nailed hand reaches in and feels some of this as Mai speaks off screen.)

Mai: Wads of wet fur. (Cut to show the three girls, Azula kneeling examining the fur while Ty Lee and Mai stand behind her.) How delightful.
Ty Lee: Hmm... They're not wads, more like... bundles. (Azula stands and looks around) Or bunches... It's got an "uh" sound.

(Azula walks off screen, there is a slight pause.)

Mai: Clumps?
Ty Lee: (Delighted) Clumps! (she jumps forward grabbing Mai around the neck in a hug.) They're clumps!

(Cut to Mai's blank face over Ty Lee's shoulder. She looks down, shot cuts to show the path of fur Aang made as he flew away. Shot cuts to Azula kneeling again, examining the fur as Ty Lee and Mai, in the background, break apart.)

Mai: The trail goes this way.

(Azula stands. Shot cuts to her head looking one direction then turns to look another. Shot cuts to a view of the tree tops Appa crashed into when taking off, Azula below looking at them. Then cut back to her as she turns to address her comrades.)

Azula: The Avatar is trying to give us the slip. (Pointing at the tree tops) You two head in that direction and keep your eye out for the bison. (Cut to shot of the fur trail again) I'll follow this trail.

(After a quick shot of Azula's determined face, the shot cuts to show Ty Lee and Mai riding their lizards down a trail. Once the two disappear from the shot, Azula's lizard enters it. Camera pans up to show her as she whips the reigns and creature dashes away. Cut to shot of the river band, the machine sitting away from it with steam pouring out of its stack. Two lizards ride off one way, one going to the other. Cut to Azula riding directly at the camera then to black as she meets it.

Fade to black for commercial break.)



Act III

(The shows returns to Aang gliding over the treetops. He is dropping Appa fur as he goes. The terrain below shifts from forest to desert, then cut to a close shot of the pouch of Appa fur strapped to Aang's body. The camera tilts up to show Aang's haggard face. He checks to make sure the fur is still escaping then bag, then looks forward resolutely. Cut to wide shot of Aang gliding towards a walled ghost town ahead of him in the distance.

The Avatar lands and folds up his glider. He walks down the towns main drag. The buildings have been damaged and there is debris everywhere. Shutters flap desolately on a window. A bell hanging on a porch rings in the wind. The town is deserted.

Shaking the last bits of fur out his bag, Aang opens his glider to leave, but stops himself. He turns and looks back down the trail of fur leading out of the ghost town. He thinks a moment, then closes his glider and sits cross legged at the end of the trail, waiting to face his pursuers.

Cut to Appa gliding among the trees. He looks exhausted. Sokka is in the saddle and Katara has the reigns. Cut Sokka moving around in the saddle to look out over the landscape from various angles.)

Sokka: Toph couldn't have made it too far. (Momo begins screeching.) What is it, Momo... oh no! Katara!

(Cut to an overhead shot from behind Sokka. Below them Mai and Ty Lee are in close pursuit on their lizards. Cut to Katara holding Appa's reigns.)

Katara: How did they find us?

(Katara shakes Appa's reigns, then cut to a profile shot of Mai and Ty Lee riding their lizards, both wearing expressions of determination.

Shift to a wide shot of Appa and the water tribe siblings. The bison is angling downward.)

Sokka: Appa, come on! We need to go faster!
Katara: He's too tired!
Sokka: Not good, not good!

(Cut back to Appa yawning, followed by a quick shot of the pursuers, then a rear shot from behind Appa that shows a river up ahead.)

Sokka: We just need to make it across that river!

(Another side shot of Appa shows him taking the tops off trees as he continues to descend.)

Katara: Come on, Appa, just a little further!

(The pursuers are now right below them. Mai throws several stilettos at Sokka, but he avoids them. Appa plows into the river and then into the far bank, leaving a deep trench in the earth. When he stops sliding, he is already asleep. The kids and Momo stand up and look to the other side of the river. Cut to a shot from the opposite bank, Appa's tail visible on the other side. Sokka and speak from o.c.)

Sokka: (voice over) We made it! We're safe!
Katara: (voice over) You did it, Appa!

(Cut to Sokka and Katara. They hug, then Katara gasps at what she's o.c. over her brother's shoulder.

Cut to a wide shot of their pursuers riding to the edge of the opposite bank. When they reach the river, their mounts rise up on two legs and run across the water. Katara launches a huge wave at them. The wave hits Ty Lee's mount, but the acrobat jumps gracefully off before the wave hits.

Ty Lee emerges from the top of the wave and lands among the nearby trees. She jumps from tree to tree, getting closer to Katara each time. Katara opens her water bottle and tries to whip the bubbly Fire Nation girl, but then has to dodge several strikes her opponent who is now in front of her. Katara then launches several sheets of water at Ty Lee, but she performs a series of somersaults and avoids them easily.

Cut quickly to Mai who has reached the near bank of the river on her mount and shoots several stilettos at targets o.c.

Shift again to a wider shot of Ty Lee closing in on Katara with a series of gymnastic maneuvers. Both girls turn as Sokka gets between them and the camera as Mai's stilettos fly into the camera, apparently aimed at Katara. Sokka destroys them with his club and boomerang before they strike. He throws his boomerang at her. Mai jumps off her mount, the boomerang flying through where she had just been sitting. She launches more stilettos at Sokka which he promptly destroys with his club. Mai then launches herself at Katara.

Cut to Ty Lee running at the camera. A ruthless grin on her face, she does a series of somersaults and jumps into the air. She comes down, then cut to a wide shot of her and Sokka. With a couple of rapid moves she renders Sokka's right arm useless. He drops the boomerang that was in his right hand, turns, and quickly finds his left arms useless as well, his club falling out of his left hand. He tries to kick her, but she deadens that as well. Then, as she tries to strike again, he head butts her outstretched hand. She pulls it back with an expression of intense pain.

She gets over it and then looks daggers at her opponent. Cut to her p.o.v. as Sokka replies.)

Sokka: Good try, but no.

(Cut to Katara who runs over to a tree on the edge of the river. She gathers up a wave of water from the river, but her arms are quickly pinned to the tree by stilettos thrown by Mai. The camera tilts to show Katara's frightened face.

A wide shot reveals Mai standing patiently several feet from Katara. A moment later Sokka hops into the picture and collapses between his sister and Mai, his behind sticking up into the air. Ty Lee enters from the right at a relaxed pace. Cut to a shot with Sokka prostrate in the foreground, Katara held fast to the tree behind him. Both look frightened and stare o.c. at their captors.)

Sokka: How ya doing?
Katara: (in a frenetic voice) Well, you know!

(Cut to a shot of Mai in the foreground, arms crossed, and Ty Lee in the background, hands on her hips. Both look o.c. at their prisoners.)

Mai: I thought when Ty Lee and I finally caught you guys (she slumps a bit and looks down in disappointment) it would be more exciting. Oh well, victory is boring.

(Suddenly, a blast of air blows Mai and Ty Lee out of the frame. Both scream as they land in the river some distance away.

Cut back to the kids and Appa, the latter of whom is now awake. He turns around to face them.)

Sokka: Thanks Appa. I don't know what we'd do without you.

(Appa responds with a tremendous lick which leaves Sokka sopping.

Cut to a wide overhead shot of Mai and Ty Lee emerging from the river away from the others, then a closer shot of them resting on the bank. Ty Lee is wringing her braid out.)

Ty Lee: (turning to Mai) Was it just me, or was that guy kinda cute?

(Cut to an afternoon shot of the ghost town where Aang waits patiently. The wind ruffles his clothes. Cut to a close up shot of his resolute face. A paid succession of shots from behind Aang, then of the trail of fur, then of Azula approaching in the distance on her lizard pass by. She reaches the main drag of the town and dismounts. Cut to a pan right overhead of the two as they face each other across the length of the main drag.)

Aang: Alright, you've caught up with me. Now who are you and what do you want?

(Cut to a shot tilting up of Azula.)

Azula: You mean you haven't guessed? You don't see the family resemblance? Here's a hint. (In an imitation of Zuko's voice) I must find the Avatar to restore my honor. (Cut to a shot of Aang who is nonplussed, then back to Azula) It's okay. You can laugh. It's funny.
Aang: So what now?
Azula: Now... Now it's over. You're tired and you have no place to go. You can run, but I'll catch you.
Aang: (standing up) I'm not running.

(Cut to a close up of Azula's mouth, the sun visible over her right shoulder. A cruel smile spreads over her face as the breeze blows a strand of her hair.

Cut to a mountain scene, the afternoon sun overhead. Toph and Iroh sit around a campfire on a rock ledge overlooking the scene. Iroh pours tea for them both. He offers her the cup, but she doesn't take it immediately.)

Iroh: Here is your tea. You seem a little too young to be traveling alone.
Toph: (she takes it) You seem a little too old.
Iroh: (laughs) Perhaps I am.
Toph: I know what you're thinking. I look like I can't handle being by myself.
Iroh: I wasn't thinking that.
Toph: You wouldn't even let me pour my own cup of tea.

(Toph takes a sip of her tea.)

Iroh: I poured your tea because I wanted to (making an emphatic gesture with his hand) and for no other reason.
Toph: People see me and think I'm weak. They want to take care of me. But I can take care of myself by myself.
Iroh: You sound like my nephew. (cut to a pan right shot of the landscape, Iroh continues in voice over) Always thinking you need to do things on your own without anyone's support. There is nothing wrong with letting people who love you help you. (cut back to a shot of the pair) Not that I love you; I just met you.
Toph: (laughs) So, where is your nephew?
Iroh: I've been tracking him, actually.
Toph: Is he lost?
Iroh: (looking o.c. with a concerned look) Yes, a little bit. His life has recently changed and he's going through very difficult times. He is trying to figure out who he is and he went away.
Toph: So... now you're following him.
Iroh: I know he doesn't want me around right now, but, if he needs me, I'll be there.
Toph: Your nephew is very lucky, even if he doesn't know it. (standing up) Thank you.
Iroh: My pleasure. Sharing tea with a fascinating stranger is one of life's true delights.
Toph: No, thank you for what you said. It helped me.
Iroh: I'm glad.

(Toph picks up her bag and begins to leave, but turns back briefly.)

Toph: Oh, and about your nephew? Maybe you should tell him that you need him too.

(Iroh considers this as he takes a sip of his tea before the scene cuts back to Aang and Azula, who still face each other across the length of the ghost town's main street. A brief shot of Aang is replaced by a close up of Azula.)

Azula: Do you really want to fight me?

(Suddenly Zuko bursts into the frame from an alley between the Avatar and Azula. He tumbles off the ostrich horse he is riding, and lands in a crouching position.)

Zuko: Yes, (he stands and throws his straw coolie hat away) I really do.
Aang: Zuko!
Azula: I was wondering when you'd show up, Zuzu.
Aang: (laughs a bit) Zuzu?

(Cut to Zuko in a firebending stance. He faces Azula, but his arms are outstretched both towards her and towards the Avatar on his other side.)

Zuko: Back off, Azula! He's mine!
Azula: I'm not going anywhere.

(She assumes a firebending stance. Cut to an overhead shot that zooms instantly outward to show the three facing off. Several zooming in close up shots pass by in rapid succession as the three eye each other, looking to see who makes the first move. Zuko looks wary, Azula confident, and Aang worried. Zuko's eyes shift from side to side and he scrutinizes his opponents.

The speed of the cuts between the shots speeds up until Azula launches a blast of blue fire at Zuko, who blocks with a wall of his own fire. Though he blocks the blast, it does knock him to the ground with a crash. Aang freaks out and jumps into the air with his glider. Azula knocks him out of the sky with a wave of blue fire. Aang lands safely, using his staff as a helicopter blade to both break his fall and dissipate the blue fire in his immediate vicinity.

Aang rolls over on the ground to get up, but Azula lands near him after jumping off a nearby roof. He avoids her, gets up with his staff, then cut to a wider shot. Zuko has gotten back up and is firing blasts at Azula in the background. Aang is between them now. Azula launches blast after blast of blue fire at Aang, but he dodges and runs around her. Several shots fly by in rapid succession as the three trade bending blasts. None land.

After a few moments, Azula chases Aang into the upper floor of a bombed out building. When the Princess enters, her expression turns to alarm, then cut to a wide shot of the building's interior. There is no floor and the drop is sheer to the bottom. Aang is on the opposite from the door sitting on an air scooter. Azula leans precipitously over the edge on the side with the door, her arms flapping comically. Cut to Aang, who smiles and waves at her, then back to Azula, who almost falls in, but recovers and manages to regain stability standing on a ledge next to the doorframe.

Right after she recovers, he brother runs in and promptly jumps into midair, screaming in surprise. He hits the ground below with a crash. Cut back to Aang, whose air scooter is dissipating. Azula fires several shots at him which miss. He dissolves the rest of the scooter, bounds over to her on the ledge and knocks her off. Cut to where she lands, gracefully and ready for action, next to Zuko who is struggling to get up from where he landed.

Cut to Aang who runs out of the door he originally entered through on the second floor. He runs down to the street level. Suddenly, the side of the building is blown open by a blast of blue fire and Zuko is blown out onto the street.

Azula appears and starts firing blasts at Aang. He dodges each, jumping up between the walls of a nearby alley, in effect scaling the buildings. As he reaches the top of the building on the left, Azula slices a triangular piece of it off with a blast of fire. The piece of the building falls out from under him, but he catches on to the remainder of the building. Azula repeats the process and this time Aang is unable to recover. He falls into the building beneath a heap of rubble.

Aang looks up from the rubble in which he is entombed inside the building. Azula enters and lights the rubble around the room on fire. Aang tries to free himself from being trapped underneath a large beam, but fails. Azula walks forward with a cruel smile. Cut to a close up of Azula as she assumes a bending stance. Over her shoulder, Katara is seen entering the doorway in the background.

Cut to a shot from behind Azula, where with one behind her for balance she is hunched forward in a firebending stance, her right hand raised to strike. Suddenly, a water whip grabs her by the hand poised to strike and yanks her backward. Cut to Aang who looks shocked, as the water whips appears from o.c. and breaks the wooden beam. Aang smiles and rubs his wrist.)

Aang: Katara!

(Azula whips around and fires a few blasts at Katara, who runs. Azula pursues her out of the building. As she passes an alley, Sokka jumps out at her and slices the air with his club, missing the Princess, but breaking her pursuit of his sister. Cut to a brief overhead shot of the Avatar, Sokka and Katara now forming an arc around Azula and pushing her back.

Zuko still lies on the ground nearby. He wakes up slowly. Cut to his p.o.v. A fuzzy picture eof Iroh resolves itself, a burning building in the background.)

Zuko: Uncle...
Iroh: Get up!

(Zuko grabs Iroh's offered hand and hauls himself to his feet.

Azula launches herself at Aang, who jumps out of the way. The Princess and the allies trade blasts and dance around each other, but it is clear that Azula is outgunned. She is falling backwards in an orderly fashion, when suddenly she is pushed to the ground from behind, revealing Toph.)

Toph: I thought you guys could use a little help.
Katara: (with a genuine smile) Thanks.

(Azula gets up and starts to run. Cut to a shot of her the view of a nearby alley. The others can't be seen, but she is clearly trading blasts with them. She turns and runs down the alley toward the camera. As she reaches the end, cut to a shot of her running into Iroh's belly. She bounces off, looking utterly confused.

Cut to a wide, overhead shot of Sokka, Aang, Katara, Toph, Zuko and Iroh closing in on Azula, whose back is now to the corner of a burnt out building. She has no place to go.)

Azula: Well, look at this. Enemies and traitors all working together. I'm done. (she raises her hands in a gesture of surrender) I know when I'm beaten. You got me. A princess surrenders with honor.

(Cut to a close up of Iroh, who shifts his gaze momentarily from Azula to the line up of his allies. Cut to Iroh's p.o.v., where se sees Toph, the girl with whom he had tea sometime earlier, and the camera zooms in on her. The shot then tilts quickly between the Avatar and his friends and Toph. Cut to Azula, who sees that her uncle is distracted as figures out the connection between the earthbender and the Avatar's party. Taking advantage of this, she strikes her uncle with a blast of blue fire square in the chest. Iroh spins in slow motion and falls. Cut to a zoom in close up shot of Zuko screaming.

All four benders then fire at Azula simultaneously and Sokka throws his boomerang. Azula makes a shield of blue fire, but the combined blows of the forces directed at her cause a tremendous explosion. Cut to a pan left shot of the rooftops as burning debris from the explosion begins to rain down. When the smoke clears, Azula is gone.

Nearby, Zuko kneels in despair beside his uncle, who lies still on the ground where he fell. Iroh groans softly as Zuko clenches him fist and teeth in anger. The others approach from behind. Cut to a view from over Zuko's shoulder. The banished Prince turns to address the Avatar's party.)

Zuko: Get away from us!

(Cut to Toph, who looks watery eyed. The camera tilts down to show her feet, then cut to Katara who places one hand over her heart and stretches out the other in a gesture of aid freely offered.)

Katara: Zuko, I can help!

(Cut to an overhead shot. Zuko turns and unleashes a wave of fire over their heads.)

Zuko: Leave!

(Aang and Katara look at each other, then cut to a wide, profile shot. The four leave Zuko and his uncle amidst the burning buildings. The shot tilts up into the rising pillars of smoke and fire emanating from the burning ghost town.

Cut to a night shot of Appa landing on a mountainside somewhere, then cut to the four sleeping peacefully, Toph and Katara next to each other.

Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(The episode opens with a view of a rocky canyon. The camera pans down to reveal Aang, Sokka, Katara, and Appa sleeping. Cut to Aang leaping into the air excitedly.)

Aang: Today's the day! Can you believe it? After all that time searching for a teacher, I'm finally starting earthbending! And this place... i-it's perfect! Don't you think, Sokka?

(Sokka rolls over, giving Aang an angry look. He moans.)

Aang: Oh, you're still sleeping, huh?

(Sokka moans again and rolls back over.)

Aang: (whispering) Sorry!

(The ground begins to shake and Aang takes a step backward. Cut to Toph's rock tent which suddenly explodes, revealing Toph standing with a fist in the air.)

Toph: Good morning, earthbending student!

(Cut back to Aang. Toph walks up to him and he bows slightly.)

Aang: Good morning, sifu Toph.

(Katara rouses from her sleeping bag.)

Katara: (sleepily) Hey... you never call me sifu Katara.

(Aang scratches behind his head nervously.)

Aang: Well, if you think I should...

(Sokka sits up and grumbles angrily. Cut to Aang and Toph.)

Toph: Sorry, snoozles. We'll do our earthbending as quietly as we can.

(Cut to Toph's feet. She kicks the ground and cracks travel toward Sokka. Cut to Sokka as a large spire of rock shoots up underneath him. Sokka screams as he's launched into the air and toward the camera. He hits the ground with a thud, then gets up and bounces toward Aang and Toph, grumbling angrily. He bounces offscreen. Cut to Toph. Aang leaps over next to her.)

Aang: So what move are you going to teach me first? Rockalanche? (He shoves his fist down to illustrate the move.) The trembler? (He pretends like he's has someone in a hold and trembles slightly.) Oh! Maybe I can learn to make a whirlpool out of land!

(He holds his arms up and spins around. Toph slaps a hand on his chest to stop him.)

Toph: Let's start with "move a rock".

(She walks offscreen.)

Aang: Sounds good! Sounds good!

(Cut to an open part of the canyon. Aang and Toph each stand in front of a boulder. Katara watches from a rock outcropping nearby.)

Toph: The key to earthbending is your stance. (She lowers herself and widens the distance between her feet. Aang tries to imitate her.) You've got to be steady and strong. Rock is a stubborn element. (She shoves Aang, causing him to stumble to the side.) If you're going to move it, you've got to be like a rock yourself.
Aang: Like a rock. Got it.

(He rubs his side where she shoved him. Cut to Toph. She straightens up.)

Toph: Good. Now the actual motion of this one is pretty simple. (She lunges forward and punches, causing the boulder to shoot off into the distance, slamming into the side of the canyon.) Okay, you ready to give it a try?

(Aang takes up a similar stance.)

Aang: I'm ready.

(His eyes narrow and he punches forward, but a blast of air sends him shooting backward. He slams into Appa's side and falls on his face. The camera zooms out, showing Sokka, still in his sleeping bag, sitting on a nearby rock.)

Sokka: Rock beats airbender!

(Cut to Iroh's dream. There's a single tree on a grassy hill. Iroh runs up the hill with Lu Ten behind him. Cut to Lu Ten who does a pretend firebending motion with his hands.)

Lu Ten: (laughs) I got you, dad!

(Cut to Iroh. He lets out a cry of pain as he falls to the ground. Lu Ten falls on top of him and they both laugh.

Cut to the future. Rain is falling on a stone object. The camera pans up to reveal and older Iroh, a look of pain on his face.)

Iroh: My beloved Lu Ten, I will see you again.

(The camera zooms out, revealing that he is on the same hill, presumably in front of a grave. The tree is leafless and the sky is a gloomy dark red color.)

Zuko: Uncle!

(Cut to a deserted, broken-down shack. The camera is from Iroh's viewpoint and Zuko is looking down at him, a concerned look on his face.)

Zuko: You were unconscious. Azula did this to you.

(Iroh attempts to get up but winces in pain. A bandage covers the left side of his chest and shoulder.)

Zuko: It was a surprise attack.
Iroh: Somehow, that's not so surprising.

(He grunts in pain as he moves to lean up against the wall. Zuko picks up a steaming cup and hands it to Iroh.)

Zuko: I hope I made it the way you like it.

(Iroh takes a sip from the cup and his eyes widen. He lets out a cry of disgust, but manages to mask it.)

Iroh: Mmm, good. (He takes another drink and grunts.) That was very, uhh... bracing!

(Zuko hands him another cup and he tosses itout the window when his nephew isn't looking.)

Zuko: So uncle, I've been thinking. It's only a matter of time before I run into Azula again. I'm going to need to know more advanced firebending if I want to stand a chance against her. I know what you're going to say: she's my sister and I should be trying to get along with her.
Iroh: No, she's crazy and she needs to go down. (Zuko nods. Iroh grunts as he stands up.) It's time to resume your training.

(Cut to Aang's group. Katara and Toph are standing next to the boulder Aang tried to move. Aang walks up, a hand behind his head.)

Katara: I don't understand what went wrong. (She glances at Toph and points at Aang.) He did it exactly the way you did.
Aang: Maybe there's another way. (He takes up a fighting stance and begins to walk toward the boulder.) What if I came at the boulder from a different angle?

(Toph grabs him by the collar and he turns around.)

Toph: No, that's the problem. You've got to stop thinking like an airbender. (She knocks her fist lightly against the side of Aang's head. He winces slightly.) There's no different angle, no clever solution, no trickity trick that's going to move that rock. (She shoves Aang. He cries out and falls down offscreen.) You've got to face it head on. And when I say head on, I mean like this!

(She runs forward. The camera pans out as she jumps into the air and crashes into the rock that Aang tried to move head-first, shattering it. Aang recoils.)

Aang: Whoa!

(He looks down, unsure of himself. Cut to Toph walking away. Katara runs to catch up with her. Toph stops.)

Katara: I've been training Aang for a while now. He really responds well to a positive teaching experience. Lots of encouragement and praise. Kind words. If he's doing something wrong, maybe a gentle nudge in the right direction.
Toph: Thanks, Katara. A gentle nudge. I'll try that. (Cut to Toph shouting.) Keep your knees high, twinkletoes!

(Cut to Aang carrying a large rock on his back. He's obviously straining to hold up the weight. The camera zooms out, showing Toph in the background stomping down and causing pillars of rock to rise underneath Aang's feet as he walks. Aang loses his balance and falls offscreen.

Cut to Toph rubbing her hands together. The camera zooms out and she begins to quickly shove her hands effortlessly into a rock. The camera pans over and Aang rubs his hands together and tries to do the same thing, but he merely hurts his hand and grunts in pain.

Cut to Aang. A bead of sweat drips down his face. The camera zooms out and Toph leaps out of the ground and lands next to him.)

Toph: Rocklike!

(Aang falls over and blinks. Toph kicks the ground and a pillar of rock shoves him back up. She pokes him in the eye and Aang grins nervously.

Cut to Sokka's face with Toph's hand holding him back. He grunts, trying to move forward. Cut to a side view, showing Sokka struggling to get his sword back from Toph, who is holding it to the side and preventing Sokka from grabbing it. She shoves him backward and he stalks offscreen. She hands the weapon to Aang, who is blindfolded. She stands on a rock in the distance and begins to kick the ground, causing columns of rock to emerge. Aang tries to hit them and finally succeeds after missing four. Cut to Toph, who nods in approval.

Cut to Toph and Aang standing in a clearing. Toph raises her arms and two walls of rock rise on either side of them. Aang looks up in amazement. Cut to Toph. She moves her fingers in a straight line in front of her and a line is drawn in the ground at her feet. She holds up her fists and rocks shoot toward her, covering her entire body except for her eyes in rock armor. Cut to Aang, who gasps in surprise. Cut to Toph's feet. She begins to slide forward. Cut to Aang. He extends his arms to stop her and slowly begins to push her back. He begins to lose ground, but finally pushes her past the line she drew in the ground.

Cut to Aang, who is tossing a rock with a handle on it into the air and catching it. The camera zooms out, showing that he's standing on two tall pillars of rock. Toph stands at the base. She walks between the pillars, stomps down, and then hits the columns with her hands, causing tremors to go up them.)

Toph: Rocklike!

(Aang doesn't budge, a look of determination on his face. Toph rises on her own pillar of rock and nods in approval. Aang gives her a huge grin.

Cut to another area of the canyon. A small baby mooselion walks up to a small patch of grass and begins to eat. The camera pans up to show Sokka looking down from a tree.)

Sokka: You're awfully cute, but unfortunately for you, you're made of meat. Just a bit closer...

(Sokka yells as he jumps down toward the baby moose lion. He misses and lands in a crevice. The baby mooselion looks at him questioningly. It walks up to him and wags its tail. Sokka brings back his sword to strike it.)

Sokka: Gotcha! (He falls deeper into the crevice and drops his sword. He's stuck up to his shoulders. He struggles to free himself but doesn't budge.) You are a lucky little meat creature.

(He points at the mooselion and it wags its tail.

Cut to Zuko and Iroh. The camera shows the outside of the decrepit building and then cuts to inside. Iroh sits in front of Zuko. A pot of tea sits on a small fire between them.)

Iroh: Lightning is a pure expression of firebending, without aggression. It is not fueled by rage or emotion the way other firebending is. Some call lightning the cold-blooded fire. (Iroh takes the tea kettle off the fire and pours it into another pot. He then begins to pour two cups.) It is precise and deadly, like Azula. To perform the technique requires peace of mind.

(He hands a cup to Zuko.)

Zuko: I see. That's why we're drinking tea: To calm the mind.
Iroh: Oh yeah, good point! I mean, yes.

(Cut to the outside of the building. Zuko and Iroh stand on the edge of a hill overlooking the valley with a walled, abandoned city at the bottom.)

Iroh: There is energy all around us. (Cut to a front view of Zuko and Iroh.) The energy is both yin and yang; positive energy and negative energy. (He holds up one finger on each hand to stand for the two forms of energy.) Only a select few firebenders can separate these energies. This creates an imbalance. The energy wants to restore balance and in a moment the positive and negative energy come crashing back together. (He brings his hands together to illustrate the point.) You provide release and guidance, creating lightning.

(Iroh holds out a hand, signaling for Zuko to step back. He holds his right hand to his side and with two fingers extended begins to create lightning by rotating his arm in a circular motion around his body. He mimics the motion with his left arm. Cut to Zuko, who looks impressed. Cut back to Iroh. He brings his two hands together and then lunges forward with his right hand extended and shoots lightning into the distance. Cut back to Zuko.)

Zuko: I'm ready to try it!
Iroh: (rubbing his injured shoulder slightly) Remember, once you separate the energy, you do not command it. You are simply its humble guide. Breathe first.

(Zuko breathes in and closes his eyes. He then begins to mimic the motions that Iroh performed, except that he does not create traces of lightning. Cut to a close up of Iroh for a moment, then back to Zuko. He shouts and shoves his right hand forward, but it merely causes a fiery explosion that shoves him backward. He falls on his back next to Iroh. Iroh shakes his head slightly.

Cut to Aang's earthbending training. Aang, Toph, and Katara stand in the middle of the canyon. Toph walks in front of Aang as she speaks.)

Toph: This time we're going to try something a little different. Instead of moving a rock, you're going to stop a rock. (She walks off screen, then quickly lunges toward Aang, who recoils slightly.) Get in your horse stance! (Aang widens his stance. Cut to Toph standing in front of Aang with a trail leading up an angled cliff behind her.) I'm going to roll that boulder down at you. (She points up the hill at a large boulder sitting at the top of the trail.) If you have the attitude of an earthbender, you'll stay in your stance and stop the rock. (Cut to a close-up of Aang's face. His mouth opens and he looks surprised and scared. Katara looks on with concern in the background. Cut back to Toph.) Like this.

(She lunges toward the boulder with her arms outstretched to illustrate what she means. Katara walks up to Toph and Aang.)

Katara: Sorry, Toph, but are you sure this is really the best way to teach Aang earthbending?
Toph: I'm glad you said something. (She reaches down and grabs Aang's belt.) Actually, there is a better way. (She jerks off Aang's belt and blindfolds him with it.) This way he'll really have to sense the vibrations of the boulder to stop it. Thank you, Katara!

(She gives Katara a thumbs-up.)

Aang: (sarcastically) Yeah, thanks Katara!
Katara: (nervously) Heh.

(Cut to Toph standing at the top of the hill with Aang at the bottom. She shoves the rock forward and it begins to roll down the slope. Aang looks worried and afraid as it rolls toward him. Katara covers her mouth with her hands, a worried look on her face. Cut to a close-up of Aang, his teeth clenched and beads of sweat flowing down his face. Cut to the rock rolling toward the camera.

Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(The boulder continues to roll down the hill toward Aang. Cut to a close-up of Aang, a frantic look on his face. Cut to Toph, the camera looking up from above. She has her arms crossed. Cut to Katara, who still covers her face with her hands. Momo cowers down on her head. Cut back to Aang, who jumps over the boulder as it almost hits him. The boulder rolls passed Katara and slams into the side of the canyon. Aang lands on the ground. Cut to Toph, running toward the camera. She runs up to Aang as he removes the blindfold, glaring at him disapprovingly.)

Aang: I guess I just panicked. I don't know what to say.
Toph: There's nothing to say. You blew it. You had a perfect stance and perfect form but when it came right down to it you didn't have the guts.

(She gives Aang a light punch to the chest that knocks him down. He sits at her feet with his legs crossed.)

Aang: I know. I'm sorry.

(Toph leans down, looking right into his face.)

Toph: Yeah, you are sorry. If you're not tough enough to stop the rock, then you could at least give it the pleasure of smushing you instead of jumping out of the way like a jelly-boned wimp! Now, do you have what it takes to face that rock like an earthbender?!

(Aang looks down sadly, not meeting her gaze.)

Aang: (sadly) No. I don't think I do.

(Toph straightens up and crosses her arms as Katara walks over to comfort Aang. She puts her hands on his shoulders.)

Katara: Aang, it's no big deal. You'll take a break and try earthbending again when you're ready. Besides, you still have a lot of waterbending to work on, okay?
Aang: Yeah... that sounds good.

(Katara and Aang walk off to the right.)

Toph: Yeah, whatever, go splash around until you feel better.

(She walks off in the opposite direction.

Cut to Zuko training. The view is from the abandoned village. A smoking hill is seen in the distance. Cut to Zuko getting blown back by an explosion. He has a frustrated look on his face and clenches his fist. Iroh looks on while leaning against the building in the background.)

Zuko: Why can't I do it? Instead of lightning, it keeps exploding in my face! Like everything always does!

(Iroh gets up from his spot and walks over to Zuko. Zuko stands up.)

Iroh: I was afraid this might happen. You will not be able to master lightning until you have dealt with the turmoil inside you.

(Zuko turns to him, an angry look on his face.)

Zuko: (frustrated and enraged) What turmoil?
Iroh: Zuko, you must let go of your feelings of shame if you want your anger to go away.
Zuko: But I don't feel any shame at all! I'm as proud as ever!
Iroh: Prince Zuko, pride is not the opposite of shame, but its source. True humility is the only antidote to shame.
Zuko: Well... my life has been nothing but humbling lately.

(Iroh looks to the side.)

Iroh: I have another idea. I will teach you a firebending move that even Azula doesn't know, because I made it up myself!

(He points a thumb toward himself and smirks slightly. Cut to Zuko who smiles.

Cut to Sokka, who is stuck up to his shoulders in the ground with the baby mooselion sitting on top of his head.)

Sokka: You probably think I deserve this, don't you? (The baby mooselion peers over Sokka's forehead and looks at him.) Look, I'm sorry I hunted you, but that's just the natural order of things! Big things eat smaller things, nothing personal. But this time it didn't work out that way.

(The baby yawns and then walks in a circle on Sokka's head before lying down again and closing its eyes.)

Sokka: I admit it. You're cute. (The mooselion begins licking its paws.) Okay, you've convinced me. If I get out of this alive, it's a comically correct vegetarian existence for me. No meat. Even though meat is so tasty.

(The baby jumps off of Sokka's head and exits the screen. A bug flies on from the left and begins to buzz around Sokka's face. Sokka makes a groaning noise as he struggles to swat it away with his trapped hands. The bug lands on his head, and Sokka grunts in defeat. Sokka perks up suddenly and the bug flies away. Cut to the baby mooselion running toward the camera with an apple in its mouth. It stops and rolls the apple toward Sokka.)

Sokka: (offscreen) Hey, it looks like my karma is already paying off!

(Cut to a profile view of the scene. The apple stops between the cub and Sokka, far out of his reach.)

Sokka: That's okay! I got it!

(Sokka struggles to reach into his backpack and then tosses his boomerang at the apple. It falls down next to it.)

Sokka: Now come back, boomerang.

(The cub's tail twitches. Cut to a pond where Aang and Katara are training. A frog sits on a rock and Momo grabs it, but the frog wiggles from his grip. Momo struggles to catch it but falls face-first into the water. The camera pans up to show Aang and Katara waterbending in the distance, moving around a ball of water between them.)

Katara: You know this block you're having is only temporary, right?

(Cut to a close-up of Aang.)

Aang: (dejectedly) I don't want to talk about it.

(Cut to a close-up of Katara, who gives Aang a concerned look.)

Katara: You do know that's the problem, don't you? If you face this issue instead of avoiding it...

(Cut to a close-up of Aang.)

Aang: (frustrated) I know I know I know I know, I get it, alright! (He lets the ball of water fall back into the pond.) I need to face it head-on, like a rock. But I just can't do it! I don't know why I can't, but I can't.

(Cut to a close-up of Katara.)

Katara: Aang, if fire and water are opposites, then what's the opposite of air?

(Cut to a full-view of the pond.)

Aang: I guess it's earth.
Katara: That's why it's so hard for you to get this. (Cut to a view of Aang's reflection that then pans up to show Aang himself.) You're working with your natural opposite. But you'll figure it out. (Cut back to Katara.) I know you will. (Katara reaches behind her and breaks off a reed. She hurls it at Aang without warning.) Think fast!

(Cut to Aang, who looks up in surprise before causing a wave of water to shoot up and slice the reed in half. The two halves sail harmlessly by him.)

Katara: Excellent. You have the reflexes of a waterbending master.
Aang: Thanks, Katara. Sifu Katara.

(He puts his hands together and bows. Cut to Katara who smiles, and then bows as well.

Cut to Iroh and Zuko. Iroh is drawing the symbols of each of the bending disciplines in the dirt with a stick as he explains them. Zuko sits cross-legged nearby, observing intently.)

Iroh: Fire is the element of power. The people of the Fire Nation have desire and will, and the energy and drive to achieve what they want. Earth is the element of substance. The people of the Earth Kingdom are diverse and strong. They are persistent and enduring. Air is the element of freedom. The Air Nomads detached themselves from worldly concerns and found peace and freedom. Also, they apparently had pretty good senses of humor! (Iroh smiles widely, but Zuko doesn't react.) Water is the element of change. The people of the Water Tribe are capable of adapting to many things. They have a deep sense of community and love that holds them together through anything.
Zuko: Why are you telling me these things?
Iroh: It is important to draw wisdom from many different places. If we take it from only one place, it becomes rigid and stale. (He draws lines separating the four symbols in the dirt.) Understanding others, the other elements, and the other nations will help you become whole.
Zuko: All this four elements talk is sounding like Avatar stuff.
Iroh: It is the combination of the four elements in one person that makes the Avatar so powerful. But, it can make you more powerful too. (He pokes Zuko's chest with his stick.) You see, the technique I am about to teach you is one I learned by studying the waterbenders.

(Cut to Zuko, who looks intrigued. Cut to an overhead view of the two, showing Iroh's picture of the four symbols in the dirt.

Cut to Aang who is sitting on a rock formation meditating with Momo sleeping at his feet. Toph walks up behind him carrying his staff. She sits down on the other side of the rock. Cut to a close-up of Toph.)

Toph: Aang! I found these nuts in your bag. (She holds up a green bag with a crudely-drawn picture of Aang's face on it.) I figured you wouldn't mind. And besides, even if you did, you're too much of a pushover to do anything about it.

(Cut to Aang with Toph in the background. He looks at her out of the corner of his eyes, an annoyed expression on his face.)

Aang: As a matter of fact, I don't mind. I'm happy to share anything I have.

(He closes his eyes and begins to meditate again.)

Toph: You know, I'm really glad you feel that way, because I also have this great new nutcracker.

(She spins Aang's staff above her head. Cut to Aang, who looks over his shoulder with a pained expression on his face. Cut to Toph as she smiles widely, lifts the staff, and smashes it down on a nut. Cut back to Aang.)

Aang: Actually, I'd prefer if you didn't... (There's another crack as Toph smashes another nut, and Aang cringes.) That's an antique, hand crafted by the monks... (There's another crack and Aang cringes again, growing more frustrated.) It's a delicate instrument!

(Cut to Toph, who is eating the nuts with Momo.)

Toph: (in a mocking tone) It's not the only delicate instrument around here.

(Toph gets up and walks off with Momo, carrying Aang's staff. She hits it along rocks as she walks. Cut to Aang, who glares at her and then tries to meditate again.)

Aang: Ohmmmm...

(Katara walks up behind Aang.)

Katara: Hey Aang, have you seen...
Aang: (annoyed) Meditating here!

(Cut to a close-up of Katara, who looks worried.)

Katara: It's important. It's almost sundown and Sokka isn't back yet. I think we should search for him.

(Cut to Aang, who looks over his shoulder at Katara with a concerned look on his face. Cut to a wider view of the scene. Aang uses his airbending to stand up and leaps off the rock while Katara runs offscreen.)

Aang: We'll find him faster if we split up.

(Cut to Sokka. The baby mooselion is biting his ponytail and pulling on it playfully.)

Sokka: Okay, karma person or thing, whoever's in charge of this stuff, if I can just get out of this situation alive, I will give up meat and sarcasm. Okay? OW! (The band holding Sokka's hair in the ponytail comes off after a strong tug by the baby mooselion and Sokka's hair becomes a fuzzy mess.) That's all I got! It's pretty much my whole identity! Sokka, the meat and sarcasm guy! (The baby mooselion exits to the right.) But I'm willing to be Sokka the veggies and straight talk fellow! ...Deal?

(Cut to Aang, who runs in front of Sokka.)

Sokka: Aang! Thank goodness! Have you got any meat?

(Aang runs up to Sokka and stops in front of his boomerang.)

Aang: Sokka! Are you okay?

(He bends down and begins to tug on Sokka's trapped arms.)

Sokka: (grunts) Stop, stop! You're going to pull my fingers off and I don't think the rest of me is coming!
Aang: (scratching his head pensively) Hmm... I bet I can airbend you out of here.

(Cut to behind Aang. He raises his arms and then slams them down, causing a huge gust of air to erupt from the crevice that sends dust flying. When the dust clears, Sokka is still trapped and his hair has been blown up in what resembles a Mohawk. His boomerang comes down and hits him in the head, flattening the Mohawk.)

Sokka: Seriously, Aang, I know you're new at it, but I could use a little earthbending here. How about it?

(Cut to Aang, who looks unsure before looking down sadly.)

Aang: (forlornly) I can't. I can't do it.

(Cut to an overhead view of Aang standing in front of Sokka. Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(Aang is still standing in front of Sokka, only now his back is to the sun.)

Sokka: (annoyed) If you can't earthbend me out of here, go get Toph.

(Cut to a close-up of Aang with Sokka in the background. Aang looks away from Sokka.)

Aang: I can't do that either.
Sokka: You can't? Why not?
Aang: It would just be really... uncomfortable.
Sokka: Uncomfortable? (Cut to a close-up of Sokka in the crevice.) Well, I wouldn't want to make you feel uncomfortable.
Aang: Thanks, Sokka. (Cut to behind the two. Aang crouches down.) This whole earthbending thing really has me confused. There's so much pressure. Everyone expects me to get it right away. It puts me in a really awkward position.
Sokka: Awkward position... I think I know the feeling.

(Cut to a profile of Aang.)

Aang: If I try, I fail. But if I don't try, I'm never going to get it. I feel like I'm caught between a rock and a hard place.

(Cut to a front view of Aang and Sokka. The baby mooselion enters from the right and walks around Sokka's head.)

Sokka: Hmm. How about that. (He motions to the mooselion.) Aang, this is my friend Foo Foo Cuddlypoops. Foo Foo Cuddlypoops, Aang.
Aang: Aww, what a cute name for a little baby sabertooth mooselion cub.

(He lifts the cub into the air.)

Sokka: Really? He looks nothing like a sabertooth mooselion.

(The camera pans up to show the baby mooselion's face.)

Aang: It's hard to tell before their giant teeth and horns grow in. Whatcha doin' out here, little guy? Did you lose your mama?

(The cub blinks at Aang. There's a roar from offscreen. Aang looks surprised and then looks over his shoulder. The camera pans out to reveal a huge sabertooth mooselion standing in the bushes. Cut to a close-up of the mooselion. It roars and shakes its head.

Cut to Zuko and Iroh. The camera pans from a small building to Zuko and Iroh practicing waterbending moves.)

Iroh: Waterbenders deal with the flow of energy. A waterbender lets their defense become their offense, turning their opponents' energy against them. I learned a way to do this with lightning.
Zuko: (excitedly) You can teach me to redirect lightning?

(Cut to Iroh. He nods.)

Iroh: If you let the energy in your own body flow, the lightning will follow it. (He points with his right arm at an angle into the air and points at it with his other hand.) You must create a pathway from your fingertips up your arm to your shoulder and down into your stomach. (He moves his left hand from his arm, to his shoulder, and then to his stomach.) The stomach is the source of energy in your body. It is called the sea of chi. Only in my case, it is more like a vast ocean. (He laughs. Cut to Zuko, who remains stoic. Cut back to Iroh.) You direct it up again and out the other arm. (He points off into the distance with his left arm.) The stomach detour is critical. You must not let the lightning pass through your heart (he walks up to Zuko and points his fingers at his chest.) or the damage could be deadly. You may wish to try a physical motion to get a feel for the pathway's flow. Like this. (He points to the left with both his arms and Zuko mimics the motion. Iroh then takes his right arm and points it in the other direction. Zuko copies this move as well. Iroh and Zuko then move their left arms to the right and back again.) Now, are you focusing your energy Can you feel your own chi flowing in, down, up, and out?
Zuko: I think so.

(He continues to mimic the motions Iroh showed him. Shift to Iroh. He begins to move his arms in waving motions at his sides.)

Iroh: Come on. You've got to feel the flow.

(Cut to later in the evening. Zuko and Iroh are still practicing the motions. Iroh suddenly stops and stands in front of Zuko.)

Iroh: Excellent! You've got it!

(Zuko bows slightly, putting his hands together.)

Zuko: Great! I'm ready to try it with real lightning!

(Cut to Iroh, who gives Zuko a questioning look.)

Iroh: What, are you crazy? Lightning is very dangerous.
Zuko: (annoyed) I thought that was the point: (Cut to Iroh, whose eyes twitch as Zuko continues.) you teaching me how to protect myself from it.
Iroh: (frantically) But I'm not going to shoot lightning at you! (He waves his arms around defensively. He turns away from Zuko and looks at him out of the corner of his eye.) If you are lucky, you will never have to use this technique at all.

(Cut to Zuko, who gazes off at dark clouds in the distance.)

Zuko: Well, if you won't help me, I'll find my own lightning.

(Cut to Iroh, who closes his eyes and trembles a bit. Cut to Zuko riding off into the distance on his ostrich.

Cut to Aang and Sokka. Aang is standing in the foreground with the baby mooselion in his hands while the mother mooselion stands in the background.)

Aang: (nervously) Hey, there... we found your cub! (He smiles and raises the baby into the air. The baby yawns. The mother growls and Aang puts the baby on the ground. It runs to its mother and then passed her into the bushes, squealing.) See? We have no problem with you! We're friendly.

(The mooselion roars and shakes its head. Cut to Sokka, his eyes wide.)

Sokka: (frantic) Aang, this is bad! You gotta get me outta here!

(Cut to the mooselion. It roars, and then begins to charge. Cut to Sokka, who cries out as the camera zooms in on his eye. Cut to the mooselion as it charges. Aang airbends the stampeding creature over his head, and it barely passes over Sokka's head before hitting the ground and spinning around. The mooselion roars loudly and Sokka looks up at Aang with a scared look on his face.)

Sokka: This is really bad! (Cut to Aang, who looks increasingly worried as Sokka speaks.) Please, Aang! You have to earthbend me out, there's no other way!

(Aang stomps down, does an uppercut move, and then aims both hands toward the sky, but Sokka doesn't budge. Aang gives him a nervous grin and then turns back to the mooselion. It scrapes its paw against the ground and prepares to charge again.)

Aang: Oh no! (Aang leaps up on a rock outcropping away from Sokka. He cups his hands around his mouth and begins to shout at the mooselion.) Whoo-hoo! Look at me!

(He begins to dance and flail about, trying to get the mooselion's attention. The mooselion, however, turns its attention back to Sokka and begins to charge. Aang leaps off the rock and shoots a gust of air at the mooselion that blows it away from Sokka. It lands and spins around again. Cut to Aang with Sokka visible over his shoulder.)

Sokka: (terrified) Please don't leave me again.
Aang: (determined) I won't.

(The mooselion charges toward Aang. He waits for it, taking up a stance and preparing to use his airbending on it. Cut to a close-up of his determined face. Cut back to the mooselion charges. It nears him and he shoves his hands forward, blowing the mooselion backwards with a strong gust of air. The mooselion hits the ground, glances at Aang, and then walks off into the bushes.

When the dust clears, Aang is still standing in his stance. Toph is revealed to be sitting on a rock in the background. She begins to clap slowly. Aang turns to her. Cut to a close up of Toph. She is sitting cross-legged on a rock, clapping slowly with her eyes closed. Cut to Aang and Sokka.)

Sokka: What are you doing here?
Toph: Just enjoying the show.
Aang: What? You were there the whole time?
Toph: Pretty much.

(Aang points at Toph accusingly.)

Aang: (angrily) Why didn't you do something? Sokka was in trouble! I was in trouble! You could've gotten him out and helped us get away!

(Cut to a close-up of Toph, who looks unaffected by the accusations.)

Toph: I guess it just didn't occur to me.

(She tosses down a nut and then pulls out Aangs staff to crack it. As she brings it down to strike the nut, Aang catches it.)

Aang: (forcefully) Enough! I want my staff back!

(He takes the staff from Toph. She stands up and jumps off the rock, standing in front of Aang.)

Toph: Do it now.
Aang: (still angry) What?
Toph: Earthbend, twinkletoes. You just stood your ground against a crazy beast, and even more impressive, you stood your ground against me. You've got the stuff.
Aang: But...
Toph: DO IT!

(Aang glances at her with confusion, then stomps down and shoves his fist forward, causing a large rock to shoot off and crash into a ridge.)

Toph: (excitedly) You did it! You're an earthbender.
Aang: (happily) I can't believe it!

(Cut to Sokka.)

Sokka: Aww, this is really a wonderful, touching moment. So, could you get me out of her so I can give you both a big, snuggly hug?
Aang: No problem, Sokka!

(He begins to march eagerly toward where Sokka is trapped, but Toph holds out a hand to stop him.)

Toph: Actually, you should probably let me do that. You're still a little new to this. You might accidentally crush him.

(Cut to Sokka, who smiles.)

Sokka: Yeah, no crushing, please.

(Toph walks up to Sokka and lifts her left foot, then stomps down. Sokka pops out of the hole and Toph grabs his hair, dragging him out as she walks away.

Cut to later in the night. Aang has an arm wrapped around Sokka to help him walk and Toph walks next to them with Aang's staff. Katara runs toward them from the foreground.)

Katara: You found him!

(She runs up to Sokka and gives him a hug. Aang and Toph watch.)

Sokka: The whole time that I was in that hole, not knowing if I would live or die, it makes a man think about what's really important. I realized...
Aang: (cutting Sokka off) Hey, Katara, look what I can do!

(Katara's gaze turns to Aang as he shoves his arms forward, causing a large rock formation to break in half.)

Katara: You did it! I knew you would! (She glances at Toph.) You tried the positive reinforcement, didn't you?
Toph: Yep. It worked wonders.

(Appa roars and Aang runs up to him.)

Aang: Appa! Appa! I can earthbend now! The key is being completely rooted! Physically and mentally unmovable!

(Appa licks Aang and he flies forward onto his face. Sokka begins to laugh and Aang joins him.

Cut to a mountain during a rainstorm. Zuko stands at the peak, staring at the clouds.)

Zuko: (defiantly) You've always thrown everything you could at me! Well, I can take it! And now I can give it back! (Lightning strikes in the distance. Cut to a close-up of Zuko's face as the rain pours off of it. He glances up at the sky.) Come on! Strike me! You've never held back before!

(He closes his eyes and a stream of tears begins to flow from his good eye. He raises his arms and shouts before collapsing onto his hands and knees.

Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence, including clips from "The Blind Bandit", "The Chase", "The Siege of the North, Part 2", "Bitter Work", and "Avatar Roku (Winter Solstice, Part 2)".]



Act I

(After the preview, the episode opens with a pan down shot from behind Aang, who is sitting on the ground cross legged in a prairie. The landscape is mostly barren save for small shoots of grass which bend in the breeze. A range of mountains can be seen in the distance. The ground in front of Aang is littered with holes.)

Sokka: (voice over) What's out here?

(Cut to a shot of the group from the front of Appa, Sokka, Toph, Katara and Momo standing behind Aang. Aang is holding a thin wooden flute in both hands.)

Toph: (kneels and places her palm on the ground) A lot actually. There's hundreds of little-

(Aang turns around and silences Toph.)

Aang: Shhh! I know you can see underground, but don't ruin the surprise. Just watch.

(Cut to a close up of Aang as he places the flute to his lips and plays a note. The view cuts back to the front as a prairie dog emerges from a hole on Aang's right and sings the same note.)

Aang: (watching as the prairie dog descends back into the hole) Heheheha, yeah!

(Aang plays another note, and another prairie dog emerges from a hole close to the camera and sings the same note, just as the previous prairie dog had done. Aang smiles and raises his hands and the flute above his head.)

Aang: I'm putting an orchestra together.

(Cut to a close up of Sokka, looking disinterested.)

Sokka: Orchestra, huh? Well la dee da.

(Sokka gestures from side to side with his hands as he says the last few words. Cut to a shot of three holes in the ground. One after the other, a prairie dog emerges from a hole and each sings a note in descending order. They all descend back down their burrows as Momo leaps down the hole to the left. A moment later, his head emerges from the middle hole.

Cut to a wide shot showing the group and several more burrows. Aang plays more notes, and each time a different prairie dog emerges from one of the burrows and matches it. Katara laughs as she watches Momo chase after each prairie dog. Cut to a shot of Aang as he is playing a note. Sokka runs up to Aang and plugs his finger into the other end of the flute, muffling the sound and causing Aang's cheeks to swell with air.)

Sokka: This is great and all, but don't we have more important things to worry about? We should be making plans.

(Sokka unplugs his finger and stands up straight, gesturing to his sides with open palms. Cut to a shot of Toph and Katara.)

Toph: We did make plans. We're all picking mini-vacations.
Sokka: There's no time for vacations.
Aang: (Looking up at Sokka) I'm learning the elements as fast as I can. (Cut to a close up of Aang.) I practice hard everyday with Toph and Katara. I've been training my arrows off.

(Cut back to the group shot. Katara walks forward a few steps.)

Katara: Yeah. What's wrong with having a little fun in our downtime?
Sokka: (crossing his arms) Even if you do master all of the elements, then what? It's not like we have a map of the fire nation. Should we just head west until we reach the Fire Lord's house? (mimics the action of knocking on a door, accompanied by the sound effect) Knock, knock! Hello, Fire Lord? Anybody home? (Humorous background music plays as Sokka says this. He leans towards Aang, closing his fists and dropping them to his sides) I don't think so. We need some intelligence if we're gonna win this war.

(Aang plays one more note on his flute, and a prairie dog pops out of a hole directly underneath Sokka and sings, surprising him. Katara giggles at Sokka as Momo peeks down the hole. Aang drops the flute and bends a small gust of air to get up on his feet.)

Katara: Alright, we'll finish our vacations, and then we'll look for Sokka's intelligence.

(Cut to a shot of Aang and Katara. A sound effect plays as Aang chuckles at Katara's joke, while Katara places her hands on her hips and smirks. Cut to a close up of a map being opened by Aang. On it can be seen what appears to be a town with an iceberg in the middle. To the left of it is a mountain range.)

Aang: (voice over) Your turn, Katara. (cut to a shot from the side of Aang holding the map open and Katara looking at it) Where would you like to go on your mini-vacation?

(Katara leans towards the map and studies it, placing her hand on her chin.)

Katara: (placing her finger on the map) How about the Misty Palms Oasis? That sounds refreshing.
Aang: Oh yeah, I've been there. It's a pristine natural ice spring, and I usually don't use the word pristine. It's one of nature's wonders.

(The close up of the map's illustration fades to a wide shot of the actual Misty Palms Oasis, accompanied by the sound of the background music slowing down and changing. Appa stands outside of the oasis walls. To the left are three sand gliders. Inside the walls are several small houses made of dry mud. There are no palm trees, and the ice spring in the middle is barely visible. Cut to a shot of Aang, Katara, Sokka and Toph outside the gates.)

Aang: Must have changed ownership since I was here.

(The Avatar laughs nervously and proceeds through the gates with the rest of the group.

Cut to a shot from behind as the group walks through the gates. An old sign hanging overhead falls to the ground with a loud crash and shatters into several pieces, causing the group to turn around in surprise. Fade to a pan right shot as the group walks past the evaporating ice spring. It is only a few feet high, and a dog with black fur is licking it for water. Cut to a shot of the outside of one of the mud houses. It has a large doorway covered by a green cloth. Loitering outside the doorway are men wearing light brown clothing and wrapped in rags. They glance at Aang, Toph, Katara and Sokka as they head inside the building.

Before Sokka can enter, the man closest to him hocks phlegm and spits it at the ground. Cut to a shot of Sokka's feet as he steps back to avoid the spit wad as it lands. Cut to a shot of Sokka as he looks down in disgust. He glares at the man, frowning and balling up his fists. Cut to a close up of the man. He is wearing a white visor with thin, rectangular slits across his eyes. He then gives Sokka a toothless smirk.

Cut to a shot outside the doorway of Sokka, the man, and Katara. The man is leaning against the wall and Sokka is still glaring at him. Katara quickly turns around and pulls him away and into the doorway, in order to prevent a fight from breaking out. Cut to a shot from inside the building as the group enters and stares at their surroundings.

Cut to a pan left shot of the interior. It appears to be a restaurant, illuminated by dim lamps hanging from poles. To the left are two patrons sitting at a wooden table. One of them takes a swig from a cup he's holding. At a table in the middle is a man wearing a tall orange hat who has fallen asleep, resting his head on the table's surface. His shoulders rise and fall as he snores. To the left is a bar, decorated with various overhanging fruit. Sitting at a stool is another sleeping man wearing dull green clothing and a white headband.

The bartender is bald and has a short brown beard. He is wearing a green tunic, a white apron and brown armbands around his biceps. There are two thin swords hanging across his back by leather straps, forming an X. Speaking to the bartender is a man wearing loose white clothing and a circular white hat. Hanging from his back are a backpack and a sleeping bag. From his waist hangs a large leather pouch.)

Professor Zei: One mango, please.

(The bartender nods. Cut to a shot of the bartender from the front. To his left are stacks of bowls and to his right is a double handled pitcher with a long, narrow neck. The bartender pulls both swords from their sheaths. He swings at one of the bowls, cutting it from the stack, then picks it up with both swords and places it on a cutting board in the middle. He then cuts down four fruits that are hanging overhead, two large yellow ones and two smaller red ones. The bartender then proceeds to rapidly dice the fruit into several smaller pieces with both swords and dumps them and some water into a bowl to complete the drink.

Cut to a close up of the cutting board as the bartender places the bowl drink in the middle. He drops a bamboo straw and a small, green umbrella into the bowl as the finishing touch. The man in white takes the drink and drops an Earth Kingdom coin on the board which the bartender takes. Cut to a shot of the group standing inside the doorway. Aang and Katara are smiling at the bartender's skill while Sokka stares thoughtfully with his hand placed against his chin.)

Sokka: I don't see anything wrong with having one of those fruity beverages while we plan our strategy.

(The others turn to Sokka as he speaks. Sokka grins and walks towards the bar, shoving Aang and Toph in the process. Cut to a shot of the bar as Sokka runs towards it, followed by Aang and Katara.)

Sokka: (signaling to the bartender) Excuse me!

(The man in white takes his drink and turns around, but then bumps into Aang, causing him to spill it onto Aang. Cut to a pan up shot of Aang, Katara and Sokka. Katara gasps as she witnesses the accident, Sokka stares at the man in white, and Aang looks down at his wet clothes.)

Aang: (looking up at the man) No worries, I clean up easy.

(Cut to the shot of the bar. Aang places his knuckles together in front of his chest and bends a gust of air around his body, drying his clothes and causing everyone else's clothes to be blown back. The man in white grabs the brim of his hat to keep it from being blown away and gasps at Aang with amazement. Cut to a close up of the man.)

Professor Zei: (in awe) You're a living relic!

(Cut to a shot of Aang, with Katara and Sokka standing behind him. The man's back is facing the camera. Toph walks in from behind.)

Aang: Thanks. I try.

(Cut back to the close up of the man. He places a hand to his chin.)

Professor Zei: An Air Nomad, right in front of me. (Cut to a shot from side of the group at the bar. Sokka is handing Katara a drink and turns back to the bartender. The man places his right fist into his left hand and gives a slight bow to Aang, who bows as well) Professor Zei, head of anthropology at Ba Sing Se University. (grabs Aang's hand and examines it) Tell me, which of the Air temples do you hail from?
Aang: The southern temple.
Professor Zei: (begins measuring Aang's skull with a pair of calipers and speaking excitedly) Oh, splendid! Now tell me, what was the primary agricultural product of your people?
Aang: (nervously) Uh, are fruit pies an agricultural product?
Professor Zei: (placing a hand on Aang's shoulder) Oh, truly fascinating. That is one for the journal.

(Cut to a shot of the group. Katara, Sokka and Toph are all holding drinks and standing behind Aang and Zei. Zei pulls a pen and note pad from his back pack and begins writing in it.)

Sokka: So professor, you're obviously a well traveled guy. Do you have a more current map? Ours seems to be a little dated.
Professor Zei: Certainly.

(Cut to a close up shot of a table. Sokka unrolls a map onto it. Cut to a shot of the group standing around the table. Toph is laying across two chairs, her legs crossed and sipping her fruit drink. Aang is now holding a drink of his own. Sokka takes a moment to examine the map.)

Sokka: What, no Fire Nation? (straitening his back) Doesn't anybody have a good map of that place?

(Katara places a hand on the map. Cut to a pan right close up of the map. On it can be seen a large desert with several paths drawn on to it.)

Katara: (voice over) You've made a lot of trips into the desert.
Professor Zei: (voice over) All in vain, I'm afraid. (Cut to a shot of Zei and Katara) I've found lost civilizations all over the Earth Kingdom, (raises his fist slightly) but I haven't managed to find the crown jewel... Wan Shi Tong's Library.

(Cut to a shot of Toph laying down. Her feet are closest to the camera, showing her dirt stained soles.)

Toph: You spent years walking through the desert to find some guy's library?
Professor Zei: This library is more valuable than gold, little lady. (raises his palms in a gesture) It is said to contain a vast collection of knowledge, and knowledge... is priceless.
Toph: (sarcastically) Mm, sounds like good times.
Professor Zei: Oh, it is. According to legend, it was built by the great knowledge spirit, Wan Shi Tong, with the help of his foxy knowledge seekers.
Sokka: Oh, so this spirit has attractive assistants, huh?
Katara: (giving Sokka's head a small shove) I think he means they look like actual foxes, Sokka.
Professor Zei: (voice over) You're both right. Handsome little creatures. (reaches into his pouch and pulls out and unrolls a large parchment) Wan Shi Tong and his knowledge seekers collected books from all over the world, and put them on display for mankind to read, so that we might better ourselves.

(Cut to a close up of the table as Zei places the parchment down. On it is an architectural drawing of a building with many domes and spires. Shift to a shot of Sokka, Katara and Zei from the table's level.)

Sokka: If this place has books from all over the world, do you think they've got info on the Fire Nation? A map maybe?

(Aang enters the screen from the left, sipping his drink through the bamboo straw.)

Professor Zei: I wouldn't know, but if such a thing exists, it's in Wan Shi Tong's Library.

(Cut to a close up of Sokka. He puts a hand to his chin and thinks for a second.)

Sokka: Then it's settled. (cut to the shot of the group around the table. Toph is sipping her drink.) Aang, I do believe it's my turn. I'd like to spend my vacation (cut to a shot of Sokka as he points his finger into the air. The background changes to a rushing one) AT THE LIBRARY!

(Zoom back out to the group shot. Sokka still has his finger raised in the air.)

Toph: (waving her hand to gain the others attention) Uh, hey? What about me? When do I get to pick?
Sokka: (crossing his arms) You gotta work here a little longer before you qualify for vacation time.

(Toph slams her bowl on the table before crossing her arms and pouting. Cut to a shot of Zei.)

Professor Zei: Of course there's the matter of finding it. I've made several trips into the Si Wong Desert, and almost died each time. (in a depressed voice) I'm afraid that desert's impossible to cross.

(Cut to a shot of Sokka and Aang, who are exchanging glances.)

Sokka: Professor, would you like to see our sky bison?
Professor Zei: (amazed) A sky bison? You actually have one?

(Cut to a shot of Appa and several of the men in rags standing outside the oasis walls. Appa growls at the men and scoots away. Zei runs in from off-screen.)

Professor Zei: (commandingly) Sandbenders! Shoo! Away from the bison!

(Cut to a shot of the sandbenders as they walk away, then to a shot of two of the sandbenders onboard one of the sand gliders. One of them bends a whirlwind of sand underneath the sail, causing the glider to be driven forward, revealing Aang and his group behind them. Aang watches the sandbenders' retreating forms, with Sokka, Katara and Zei standing behind him. Shift to a wide shot from above of the two of the sand gliders racing off in the distance.

Cut to a pan down shot of the sun from below. Appa flies overhead and towards the desert horizon. Cut to a pan right shot of Toph, Katara and Sokka sitting in Appa's saddle. Sokka has taken his shirt off and tied it onto his head to protect himself from the sun. Sokka takes a spyglass and turns to the side. Cut to a shot from the front of Aang, Zei, and Momo sitting on Appa's head. Sokka is looking out in the distance with the spyglass. Zei climbs forward. Cut to a shot of Appa from below. Zei sticks his head out so he can speak to the flying bison.)

Professor Zei: Tell me, sky bison. Are you the last of your breed?

(Appa responds by giving a low roar.)

Professor Zei: (excitedly) Oh, delightful! I only wish I spoke his tongue. (Cut to a shot of Zei as he runs his fingers through Appa's fur.) Oh, the stories this beast could tell. (Momo comes to sit next to Zei and begins chattering. Zei turns to Momo and places a finger to his lips.) Shush, chatty monkey.

(Cut to a shot of Aang examining the drawing of the library.)

Aang: Wow, shouldn't be too hard to find a place like this out here.

(Cut to a shot of the drawing as it gently flutters in Aang's hands. Several scenes go by in rapid succession, making it clear that some time has passed as they search for the Library.)

Toph: (frustrated) Aw, does this place even exist?
Professor Zei: (smiling and holding his finger up) Some say it doesn't.
Toph: Shouldn't you have mentioned that before?

(Toph falls onto her side and groans, putting her dirty feet over the saddle's edge. Fade to a shot from above of Appa flying. He gives a low roar. Cut to a shot of Zei in the saddle writing down notes. The camera pans to the left to show Toph who suddenly sits up and points out into the desert.)

Toph: (in excitement) There it is!

(The camera zooms out to show Katara and Sokka looking in the direction Toph is pointing. Cut to a shot of empty sand dunes that pass by. Katara, Sokka, Aang and Momo turn towards Toph and glare at her for tricking them. Cut back to the shot of Toph.)

Toph: That's what it will sound like when one of you spots it.

(Toph turns to the others and gives them a blank grin, waving her hand in front of her eyes to remind them of the fact that she is blind. She quickly goes back to clutching the saddle. Cut to a shot from the side of Appa flying over the desert, then to a shot from the front of Sokka, Katara, Aang and Momo. Sokka is searching for the library through his spyglass and Katara is using her hand as a visor. Aang appears fatigued, and Momo has fallen asleep on top of the airbender's head.)

Katara: It shouldn't be this hard to spot a giant ornate building from the air.

(Cut to a close up of Sokka as he looks through his spy glass. Cut to Sokka's perspective as he peers through the device. He quickly spots a spire sticking out from the sand. Cut back to the shot of Sokka, Katara and Aang. Sokka points down at the spire.)

Sokka: Down there. What's that?

(Aang perks up, causing Momo to be awakened. He and Katara both look in the direction Sokka is pointing. Cut to a shot from above of Appa descending down to the spire. Fade to a pan left shot from above. The top of the spire is closest to the camera. On the ground are Aang and his group looking up at it. Appa is sitting behind them.)

Katara: (disappointedly) Forget it. It's obviously not what we're looking for. The building in this drawing is enormous.

(They all turn their heads as something glimmers atop one of the sand dunes in the distance. Cut to a shot of a large gray fox as it climbs over the top of the dune. In its mouth is a scroll. It pauses and turns to look at the humans, the scroll in its mouth glints in the sunlight. The fox continues and walks off-screen)

Sokka: What kind of animal is that?

(Cut to a pan right shot as the fox gallops towards the spire's base. Instead of stopping, the fox begins running up the spire at a ninety degree angle. The camera follows it up as it does so. Cut to a shot from the inside of the top of the spire. The camera is looking out at the group through one of the windows.)

Professor Zei: I think that was one of the knowledge seekers.

(The fox jumps through the window. Cut to a shot of Zei.)

Professor Zei: Oh, we must be close to the library!

(Cut to a shot of Aang, Sokka and Katara all looking at the drawing.)

Sokka: No, this is the library. (points up at the spire) Look!

(Cut to a shot of Sokka's finger pointing to the top. He brings his finger down and points at the drawing. The drawing of the library drops below the camera, showing the base of the spire.)

Sokka: (voice over) It's completely buried.

(Cut to a zoom out shot of the spire from far away, and then cut to commercial.)



Act II

(The show continues with a fade into a tilt up the shot of the spire from a distance.)

Professor Zei: (voice over, shouting) The library is buried!

(Cut to a shot of the group standing in front of the spire. Zei runs forward before falling to his hands and knees.)

Professor Zei: (depressed) My life's ambition is now full of sand.

(Cut to a shot of Zei. Smiling, he lifts his head and reveals a small shovel in hand.)

Professor Zei: Well, time to start excavating.

(He attempts to unearth the library using the tiny shovel. Cut to a close up of the spire's surface as Toph places her palm against it.)

Toph: (voice over) Actually, (cut to a pan left shot of Top, with Aang, Katara, Sokka and Momo standing in the background) that won't be necessary. The inside seems to be completely intact, and it's huge.
Sokka: That fox thingy went in through a window. I say we climb up there and give it a look.

(Cut to the shot of Toph and the others. Toph has her arms crossed.)

Toph: I say you guys go ahead without me.
Katara: You got something against libraries?
Toph: I've held books before, and I gotta tell you, they don't exactly do it for me.

(Cut to a shot of Katara. She gives a nervous laugh and scratches the back of her head.)

Katara: Oh, right. Sorry.
Toph: Let me know if they have something you can listen to.

(Cut to a shot of one of the windows at the top of the spire. Sokka's boomerang, with a rope tied to it, is thrown through the window. Cut to a shot of Sokka, Zei and Katara. Sokka begins climbing the rope as Katara and Zei watch. The camera pans left to show Toph, Aang and Appa.)

Aang: (petting Appa) Don't worry buddy. I'm not making you go underground ever again. You can stay out here with Toph.

(Aangs walks off screen. Cut to Toph who crosses her arms and both she and Appa look away from each other. They then look back at each other, Appa giving a soft grunt. Both stare at each other a moment.)

Toph: What's up?

(Cut to a shot from the inside of the spire as Zei, Aang, Sokka and Katara descend the rope. A floor can be seen at the bottom. Cut to a closer shot of the four, passing the camera as they climb down. Momo glides down after them. Cut to a shot from below as the group descends into a large room.)

Professor Zei: (in awe) Oh, it's breath taking. The spirits spared no expense designing this place.

(Cut to a shot from the side of Zei, Aang and Sokka. The large room is supported by many pillars and archways. The visage of an owl is carved into the arcs.)

Professor Zei: Look at those beautiful buttresses!

(Cut to a shot from above of Sokka, Aang and Zei hanging from the rope. Sokka and Aang both chuckle at the word 'buttresses.')

Professor Zei: What's funny?
Aang: Nothing. We just like architecture.
Professor Zei: (smiles) As do I.

(Cut to a shot of the group reaching the bottom. The land on a wide, cross shaped bridge that connects to each side of the room. Past the archways are long rows of bookshelves. The area is dimly lit by green lamps hanging from the walls. Cut to a shot of Zei as he pushes his hat back and gazes at the top of the room.)

Professor Zei: (amazed) My word!

(Cut to a shot of a large owl mosaic set across the top of an arc. Sokka, Katara and Aang walk in from off screen. Momo is sitting on Aang's shoulder.)

Professor Zei: The exquisite mosaic handiwork of this tile-rendered avian symbol... (Cut to a shot of the group as they all stare at Zei in confusion.) Eh, nice...owl.

(The group turns at the sound of feathers rustling. Katara and Sokka run off screen. Cut to a shot from behind the archways as Katara and Sokka hide behind a large pillar to the right. Aang takes Zei's hand and pulls him behind the pillar on the left. Cut to a shot of an enormous black owl with a white face walking through an archway and onto the bridge. Cut to a shot of Aang peeking at the owl from behind the pillar where he sees the owl examining the rope. It begins to turn its head to the left. Cut to a close up of the owl as it turns its head around three hundred and sixty degrees, revealing two white spots on the back of its head that resemble eyes.)

Owl: I know you're back there.

(Cut to a shot of Aang and Zei standing behind the pillar. Zei smiles and walks out onto the bridge. Cut to a shot of Zei coming towards the giant owl.)

Professor Zei: (excitedly) Hello! I'm Professor Zei, head of anthropology at Ba Sing Se University.

(Cut to a shot of Zei bowing to the owl who towers above him.)

Owl: You should leave the way you came, (the owl turns his head to the left) unless you want to become a stuffed head of anthropology.

(The camera quickly pans to the left to show three stuffed animal heads hanging from a pillar, then to a shot of Zei as he rubs his neck and groans nervously. Cut to a shot of the archway as Katara, Sokka and Aang walk onto the bridge.)

Sokka: Are you the spirit who brought this library to the physical world?
Owl: Indeed, I am Wan Shi Tong, he who knows 10,000 things. And you are obviously humans, which by the way are no longer permitted in my study.
Aang: What do you have against humans?
Wan Shi Tong: Hmm, humans only bother learning things to get the edge on other humans, (fade to the clip from The Siege of the North Part II of Zhao's flashback of the library) like that firebender who came to this place a few years ago, looking to destroy his enemy.

(Cut to a close shot of Wan Shi Tong from the side.)

Wan Shi Tong: So, (quickly brings his face close to Sokka's, startling him) who are you trying to destroy?

(Cut to a close up of Sokka's reflection in Wan Shi Tong's large black eye.)

Sokka: (smiling nervously and waving his hand in protest) What? Oh, no, no, no destroying, we're not into that.
Wan Shi Tong: (voice over) Then why have you come here?
Sokka: (trying to think of an answer) Um, knowledge, for, knowledge's sake.
Wan Shi Tong: If you're going to lie to an all-knowing spirit being, you should at least put some effort into it.
Sokka: I'm not lying. I'm here with the Avatar, (points behind with his thumbs and pulls Aang in front of him) and he's the bridge between our worlds, he'll vouch for me. (pats Aang on the shoulder before nudging him in the back.)
Aang: Ow. (cut to a close up of Aang) Uh, yeah, I'll vouch. We will not abuse the knowledge in your library, good spirit. (cut to a shot from the side of everyone standing on the bridge) You have my word.

(Everyone bows to Wan Shi Tong.)

Wan Shi Tong: Hmm, very well. I'll let you peruse my vast collection, on one condition. (cut to a shot of Aang and his group as they frown at the last few words. Cut to a pan left shot from above.) To prove your worth as scholars, you have to contribute some worthwhile knowledge.

(Aang takes a step back as Zei steps forward. Cut to a shot of Zei as he kneels and presents a thick tome.)

Professor Zei: Please accept this tome as a donation to your library.
Wan Shi Tong: First edition, very nice.

(Cut to the shot of Zei as Wan Shi Tong passes his wing over the tome, causing it to vanish from Zei's hands. Zei steps back and Katara steps forward. The camera pans up to show her holding open a waterbending scroll.)

Katara: I have an authentic waterbending scroll.
Wan Shi Tong: Oh... these illustrations are quite stylish.

(Cut to the shot of Katara as Wan Shi Tong takes the scroll. Katara bows her head to the spirit. Cut to a shot of Aang with his finger to his chin, thinking of what to give Wan Shi Tong.)

Aang: Uh, oh, I know! (pulls a scroll from his shirt collar and presents it, revealing it to be a Fire Nation wanted poster of the Avatar. The sound of a trumpet plays to give dramatic effect.) Ha!

(Cut to a shot of Wan Shi Tong examining the poster.)

Wan Shi Tong: I suppose that counts.

(Cut to a shot from the side of Wan Shi Tong taking Aang's offering. Sokka walks up to the knowledge spirit.)

Sokka: Oh, great spirit, (cut to a shot of Sokka holding a piece a string between his fingers. The others, standing behind him, look puzzled.) check this out! (quickly ties the string into a butterfly shaped knot and holds it out, accompanied by the sound of chimes) Ta da!

(Cut to a shot of Wan Shi Tong as he stares in silence. Cut back to the shot of Sokka holding the knot.)

Sokka: It's a special knot! That counts as knowledge.
Wan Shi Tong: (after a brief pause) You're not very bright, are you?

(Cut to the shot of Sokka, who frowns and groans at the spirit's comment. The knot is quickly snatched by Wan Shi Tong's wing. Cut to the shot from the side of everyone on the bridge.)

Wan Shi Tong: Enjoy the library.

(Wan Shi Tong turns and jumps off the bridge, extending his wings. Cut to a pan down shot as he soars down to the library's lowers levels. Cut to a shot of the group as they watch him fly down before turning to leave. Cut to a shot of Sokka as he stares after Wan Shi Tong with contempt.)

Sokka: Bright enough to fool you.

(Fade to a pan up shot from above of Toph and Appa sitting in the spire's shadow. Cut to a shot of Toph and Appa.)

Toph: So, you like flyin'?

(Appa responds by grunting and scratching his ear.)

Toph: Of course, I'm more comfortable on the ground, where I can see. Well, I don't see the way you do. I feel the vibration in the ground with my feet, (cut to a closer shot of Toph as she picks up a handful of sand and lets it sift through her fingers) but this sand is so loose and shifty, it makes everything look fuzzy.

(Cut to a wider shot of the two. Appa sits up and yawns loudly.)

Toph: Not that there's anything wrong with fuzzy.

(Cut to a pan down shot of a large hall of bookshelves that stretch up to the tall ceiling. Between the shelves is a large statue of a bird resembling a phoenix. Aang, Katara, Sokka, Zei, and the large fox are standing to the left next to a bookshelf. Cut to a shot of Aang and Momo sitting down and the fox placing a book onto a shelf. Aang is holding a book, and his staff is leaning against the bookshelf. The camera pans right to show Sokka, Katara, and Zei sitting between two tall stacks of book. Cut to a shot of Aang as he flips a page in the book and smiles. Cut to a shot of the page Aang is looking at. On it is an illustration of a giant turtle with the face of a lion looming over a man wearing a long robe. Behind it are two other lion-faced turtles. Cut to a shot of the group. Aang holds the book up to the others.)

Aang: Hey, look at these weird lion turtle things.

(Cut to a shot of Sokka pulling a book from the shelf. Katara is leaning against the shelf and reading a book in the background. Sokka glances at Aang's book.)

Sokka: Eh, I've seen weirder.

(Katara walks towards the camera.)

Katara: Aang, did you know in a past life, you were left handed?

(Cut to a shot of Momo, Aang and Katara. Aang smiles and scratches the back of his head.)

Aang: I always knew I was special.

(Cut to a shot of Zei grabbing several more books from the shelves, stacking them in his hands. Sokka walks past him and sees a scroll sticking out from one of the shelves. He pulls it out, unrolls it and examines the scroll before slipping it into his bag. Cut to a shot of a short pedestal displaying a piece of paper covered in glass. Sokka walks towards it from off screen. Cut to a close up of the paper beneath the glass. Its edges have been burned and there is something written on it. Sokka's face is reflected off the glass as he reads the writing, placing a hand to his chin.)

Sokka: (reading) The darkest day in Fire Nation history. It's got a date at the top, but it doesn't say anything else.

(Sokka takes out his machete and uses it to lift the glass up. Cut to a shot of the corner of the glass sheet as Sokka slips the burned paper out from under it. He rolls up the paper and walks over to the side. Aang, Momo, Katara and Zei walk in from behind a bookshelf.)

Aang: Sokka, where are you going?

(Cut to a shot of Sokka as he turns around and holds the paper up.)

Sokka: I want to know what happened to the Fire Nation on their darkest day. This could be promising. (Cut to a shot of the group running through the library.) The information on the Fire Nation should be right up here.

(Cut to a shot of the group walking towards an ornate at the end of a hall. Above the doorway is a large red tapestry with the symbol of fire on it. Sokka, Katara, and Aang as they walk through the doorway. Momo is sitting on Katara's shoulder. Cut to a pan up shot from above of the interior of the room. It is filled with the burned debris of books and bookshelves. Zei takes a few steps forward and Momo jumps off Katara's shoulder.)

Aang: Firebender.
Katara: They destroyed everything having to do with the Fire Nation.
Sokka: (frustrated) That's so unfair! (places his hands against his head) Just when I think I'm one step ahead of the Fire Nation, it turns out they beat us here a long time ago.

(Sokka falls to his knees. Cut to a pan right shot of Sokka as he picks his head up. As the camera moves, the fox can be seen standing on its hind legs behind him.)

Sokka: I need to know what happened on the darkest day.

(The fox whimpers and Sokka turns his head around to see it. The camera focuses on the fox. Cut to a close up of Sokka.)

Sokka: Hello, little weird fox guy.

(Cut to a shot of the fox. It whimpers again and turns around, pointing its nose down the hall. Cut to a pan left shot of the entire group. Zei is pointing at the fox.)

Professor Zei: Seems it's trying to assist you.
Sokka: Um, sure, I'll guess I'll follow you.

(Sokka, Aang and Katara follow the fox. The fox runs up to a wall with a sun symbol on it before turning and running off screen to the right. The rest of the group walks forward from off screen, staring at the large symbol. Cut to a shot of the fox crawling though a hole located in the wall. The center of the symbol slowly rolls to the side, creating an opening. Cut to a close up of the opening as the center rolls to the side, revealing the fox sitting behind it. It makes a small whimper when it sees them. The kids enter.

The room is dome shaped and on the walls are painted mountains, clouds and the sky. The whole area is dark, illuminated only by light from outside the door. Cut to a shot of the center of the room as the group walks towards a large stone pedestal standing there. The fox pushes a lever next to the pedestal. Cut to a shot of the area as the false sky fills with stars, all revolving. Sokka, Katara, Aang and Momo as they all look up with wonder, the light of the stars passing over them. Cut to a shot of a moon symbol attached to a mechanical device as it moves across the sky.)

Professor Zei: This room is a true marvel. A mechanical wonder! (places his hands on his head and smiles) It's a planetarium that shows the heavens moving.
Sokka: Uh, this is beautiful, but, how is it helpful?

(Cut to a shot of Aang, Katara, Sokka, Momo and the fox standing around the pedestal. It has a slightly domed top, and circling it are different symbols. There is a yin-yang in the center. The outmost symbols depict animals. Zei walks on screen from the left and begins examining the pedestals.)

Katara: Maybe these dials represent dates and times. (points to the dials) Sokka, try entering that date from the parchment you took.
Sokka: Shh! Katara! (places his hand in front of his mouth and begins whispering, eyeing the fox warily) Not in front of the fox, he's with the owl.

(Cut to a shot of the fox. It lowers its head and puts its ears back, whimpering dejectedly. Cut to a shot of Sokka as he slightly raises the burned parchment out from his bag, examines it and adjusts the dials. He pushes the lever forward the machine begins to operate. The camera pans up to show the sun symbol moving.)

Aang: Wow, I gotta hand it to you Sokka. You picked the best mini-vacation, for sure.

(Cut to a pan right shot of the group as the sky changes back to day. The room suddenly becomes dimmer. Cut to a wide shot of the area. The moon symbol is in the sky.)

Katara: Hey wait, what happened to the sun?
Aang: Great, you must have broken it.
Sokka: It's not broken.

(Cut to a close up of the moon symbol. The edge of the sun symbol can be seen peeking from behind it.)

Sokka: (voice over) The sun is behind the moon, it's a solar eclipse! It's literally the darkest day in Fire Nation history. Now I get it! (grabs Aang by the shoulders and turns him) Something awful happened on that day, I don't know what, but I do know why.

(Cut to a shot of the group. Zei is writing in his notebook and Katara watches as Sokka shakes Aang.)

Sokka: Firebenders loose their bending during a solar eclipse! (pushes Aang and lets go of him, causing the Avatar some discomfort) Sorry.
Katara: That makes sense. (Cut to a close shot of Sokka and Aang as Katara walks in from the right.) I mean, think of what the lunar eclipse at the North Pole did to the waterbenders. This is huge.

(The sound of the fox whimpering is heard. Cut to a shot of the fox at Sokka's feet as it whimpers and raises both its front paws, as a dog would when it begs for a treat. Cut to a shot of Sokka smiling as he looks at the fox.)

Sokka: Fine, you earned it.

(Cut back to the shot of the fox as Sokka pulls a treat from his bag and throws it to him. The fox catches it in his mouth and runs off. Cut to a shot of Sokka, Aang and Katara from below.)

Sokka: We've got to get this information to the Earth King at Ba Sing Se. We'll wait for the next eclipse, (cut to a close up of Sokka) then we'll invade the Fire Nation when they're totally helpless. The Fire Lord is goin' down!

(Sokka raises his fist in triumph and grins. The smile is quickly replaced by a frown as a dark shadow loom over Sokka. Cut to a shot of the group as Wan Shi Tong approaches them. Sokka turns around to see the knowledge spirit.)

Wan Shi Tong: Mortals are so predictable. (cut to a close up of Wan Shi Tong) And such terrible liars.

(Cut to a shot of the group as they stand in Wan Shi Tong's shadow, staring with fright. Sokka gulps then cut to a commercial.)



Act III

(The show returns to a fade in to a shot from the outside of Wan Shi Tong standing the planetarium's doorway.)

Wan Shi Tong: You betrayed my trust. (cut to a shout from the inside of the group facing Wan Shi Tong) From the beginning you intended to misuse this knowledge for evil purposes.
Sokka: You don't understand. (raises fist) If anyone's evil, it's the Fire Nation. You saw what they did to your library. They're destructive and dangerous. We need this information.
Wan Shi Tong: You think you're the first person to believe their war was justified? (leans towards the group) Countless others before you have come here, seeking weapons or weaknesses or battle strategies.
Aang: (pleading) We had no choice. Please, we're just desperate to protect the people we love.

(Cut to a close up of Wan Shi Tong.)

Wan Shi Tong: And now I'm going to protect what I love.

(Quickly zoom out to a shot of Wan Shi Tong beating his wings, causing a strong gust throughout the planetarium. Cut to a shot of the group bracing themselves against the wind.)

Aang: What are you doing?

(Cut to a shot of Wan Shi Tong beating his wings.)

Wan Shi Tong: I'm taking my knowledge back. No one will ever abuse it again.

(Cut to a shot of the group looking towards the ceiling. Sand is seeping through the walls.)

Katara: He's sinking the building! We've gotta get out of here!

(Cut to a shot from behind Wan Shi Tong. His neck grows several feet longer and feathers resembling horns appear on his head. Aang and the group watch in terror as the spirit transforms.)

Wan Shi Tong: I'm afraid I can't allow that. (cut to a close up of Wan Shi Tong) You already know too much.

(The spirit lifts his head high into the air before screeching and lunging forward.

Cut to a shot of the group jumping out of the way. Wan Shi Tong hits the floor, causing it to crack. Wan Shi Tong chases after the group as they flee the planetarium, shouting with fright. Cut to a shot of Sokka, Katara, Zei, Aang and Momo as they run out of the planetarium, then to a tilt up shot of Appa and Toph sitting next to the spire. Cut to a closer shot of the two as Appa lifts his head up and gives a loud roar. The spire behind them slowly begins to sink and a low rumble can be heard. Cut to a shot of Toph sitting against one of Appa's legs. The screen begins to shake.)

Toph: I already told you, I don't want to snuggle.

(Toph grunts as Appa stands up and walks off screen, causing her to fall back. Toph picks herself off the ground. Cut to a shot of Toph standing in front of the sinking spire. Cut to a shot of Toph from the front with Appa standing behind her.)

Toph: The library's sinking. The library's sinking!

(Toph runs up to the spire before jabbing her hands into its surface. The camera tilts up to show cracks spreading. Cut to a shot of Toph grunting as she attempts to hold the library up, her feet sinking into the sand. After much effort, the spire slows down and stops sinking.

The camera tilts down and fades to a shot from above of Aang and the group running down one of the long hallways. Streams of sand are pouring from the ceiling and forming small pools on the floor. Shift to a shot of them passing under an arch and running towards the camera. Wan Shi Tong bursts through the arch, destroying it, and continues to chase them.

Cut to a shot of Aang, Katara, Sokka, Zei and Momo running down another hallway. Cut to a shot of Wan Shi Tong flying swiftly over the floor, causing bits of rubble to go flying in his wake. Cut to a shot of Katara, Momo, Sokka and Aang running across a bridge and past the camera. Zei stops and turns around, yelping and gasping for breath. He is still holding a large stack of books.)

Professor Zei: (frightened and exasperated) Great knowledge spirit, I beg you. Do not destroy your vast collection of priceless tomes.

(Zei stands on the bridge as Wan Shi Tong quickly approaches. Aang looks back as he runs across the bridge. He hops and twists in the air, bending a vacuum between his hands. Cut to a shot of Zei being pulled back by the vacuum just before Wan Shi Tong attacks the spot where he stood. Zei yells as he is pulled back, causing him to drop all of his books. Cut to a shot of Zei sliding across the floor. The camera pans to the right as Sokka and Katara catch him.

Wan Shi Tong flying across the bridge in pursuit. Cut to a shot of Aang as he hops forward, twists in the air, and swings his staff in an upward arc as he lands, bending a strong gust of air. Cut to a shot of Wan Shi Tong as the gust collides with him, causing the spirit to be knocked over the side of the bridge. The spirit falls down to the lower levels of the library. Cut to a shot of Katara, Sokka, Momo and Zei standing to the right. Aang runs on screen from the left.)

Aang: We've gotta get back to the surface.

(Aang turns a corner and runs down a hallway away from the camera. Katara, Momo and Zei follow after him, but Sokka stays behind. Cut to a shot of Sokka looking hesitant. He turns his head and looks back at the bridge.)

Katara: (voice over) Sokka, let's go!
Sokka: But we still don't know when the next eclipse is gonna happen.
Katara: Don't be stupid, we'll find out later.

(Cut to a shot of Sokka standing across from Katara, Aang, Zei and Momo.)

Sokka: No, we won't. (gestures to the side) If we leave this place we'll never get the information. (raises fist) Aang, come with me to the planetarium, I need cover.

(Aang runs over to join Sokka. Cut to the shot of Katara, Zei and Momo.)

Sokka: (voice over) Katara, take Momo and get out of here.
Katara: But-

(Katara is cut off by a large crash from the left, causing her and Zei to flinch. Cut to a shot of Wan Shi Tong emerging from the dust between Katara and Sokka.)

Sokka: Go!

(Katara, Momo and Zei run off screen as Wan Shi Tong screeches and chases after them.)

Katara: (voice over) Hurry, Sokka!

(Sokka and Aang turn away from the camera and run towards the bridge. Cut to a shot of Katara and Zei as they run down the hallway. Zei runs off to the right between two bookshelves. Wan Shi Tong enters from off screen. Cut to a shot of Zei and he falls to the ground with a grunt and covers his head. Wan Shi Tong runs past the screen, not noticing him. Zei opens his eyes and makes sure it's safe. He looks to his right and pulls a large book from the shelf. Humorous background music plays as he does this and grins widely.

Cut to a shot of Katara running and panting. Momo is clinging to her head and looking back. Katara turns her head to see what is behind her. Cut to a shot of Wan Shi Tong as he swoops down and screeches, his face closing in on the camera.

Switch to a shot of Toph holding up the library and Appa standing behind her. Cut to a close up of Toph as she strains to keeps the building from sinking. Cut to a shot of Appa as he turns his head around. The camera pans to the left to show a dust storm approaching. Cut to a shot of Toph turning her head around.)

Toph: What is it now?

(Cut to a shot of three sand gliders driving through the desert. Cut to a pan left shot of the face of a sandbender, his face covered by wrappings and his eyes covered by a visor. Cut to a pan left shot of a glider as a sandbender bends a shock wave of sand. The sand shockwave quickly closing in on the camera. Cut to a shot of Appa as the sand hits him, swirling around him, then to a close up of Toph.)

Toph: Who's there?

(Cut to a shot of the sand gliders circling Appa. A sandbender jumps off of a glider, bending a whirlwind of sand as he lands.

Switch to a tilt down shot of Sokka and Aang running across a bridge. The walls are crumbling and more sand is pouring in. Cut to a shot of the doorway of the planetarium as Sokka and Aang run inside.)

Aang: Why are we doing this?
Sokka: Because if this calendar can tell us about eclipses in the past, then maybe it can project when the next one will be. (removes his bag from his shoulder and turns the dial)
Aang: You can't possibly check every single date.
Sokka: I don't have to. (turns the dial) We just have to check every date before Sozin's comet arrives, because after that... Well, try not to think about that.

(Cut to a close up of the dial as the date on it changes. Several shots in rapid succession show Aang and Sokka trying different dates on the machine.)

Aang: Come on, eclipse!

(Cut to a pan up shot of the sun symbol as it moves. The moon symbol comes in from the left and stops over the sun symbol, creating the desire eclipse.)

Sokka: (voice over) That's it, the solar eclipse! (cut to a wide shot of the planetarium as it darkens) It's just a few months away.

(Cut to a shot of Sokka and Aang. Aang grins as Sokka writes down the date of the eclipse.)

Sokka: Got it. (puts the date into his bag) Now, let's get to Ba Sing Se.

(They exit the planetarium.

Cut to a pan left shot of the sandbenders surrounding Appa. Using a series of ropes with bags of sand tied to the ends for added weight, the sandbenders systematically pin Appa down. Appa resists, but begins to weaken. Cut to a shot of Toph still holding the library. She turns her head around.)

Toph: Don't make me put this down.

(Toph lets go of the spire and turns around to attack, extending her right hand and bending a wave of sand at the sandbenders. The spire begins sinking again. The sand wave passes by them, missing by a few feet. Toph turns back around and thrusts her hands back into the spire. Behind her can be seen Appa and the sandbenders. The camera quickly pans right to shot of Appa brought down and being dragged away. Cut to a shot of the sand gliders pulling the flying bison over the sand and away from Toph. Appa gives a frightened groan. Cut to a close up of Toph.)

Toph: No, stop sinking!

(Cut to a shot of Toph letting go of the spire. The camera zooms out to show her bending waves of sand in random directions, first to the right, then left, then right again. Cut to a shot of Toph turning back around and thrusting her palms back into the surface of the spire.)

Toph: No! (sadly) I'm sorry Appa.

(Toph squeezes her eyes shut. The camera pans right to show Appa being dragged away into a cloud of dust.

Fade to a close up of Katara and Momo running through the library. Panting, she turns her head to look behind her. Cut to a shot of Wan Shi Tong drawing closer, opening his beak and screeching. Katara runs toward a bookshelf before turning right and running down the main hallway. Wan Shi Tong quickly follows after.

The camera pans as he runs down the hallway after Katara. Cut to a shot of Katara leaning against the side of a bookshelf, frightened, panting and clutching Momo. She looks to her right. The camera pans left to show Wan Shi Tong sticking his neck between the bookshelves. Cut to a close up of Wan Shi Tong turning his head towards the camera. Cut to Wan Shi Tong's p.o.v. where he quickly spies Momo's tail sticking out from the edge of the bookshelf.)

Wan Shi Tong: At least I'll have one specimen to add to my collection.

(Wan Shi Tong lunged after Katara and Momo, who yell with fright. Katara gets up and runs between the bookshelves. Wan Shi Tong pecks the ground where Katara sat and chases after. Cut to a shot of Katara running down the hallway and turning right at a corner. Wan Shi Tong follows.

Cut to a shot of the bridge where the rope is dangling. Katara skids along the ground and runs onto the bridge. Wan Shi Tong flies past the camera before turning and walking on to the bridge. Cut to a shot of Katara and Wan Shi Tong standing on the bridge. Katara stops running and turns to face the knowledge spirit. Cut to a shot of Katara in a waterbending stance, her arm poised over her water flask. The rope is only a few feet behind her. Wan Shi Tong's shadow passes over her as he closes in.)

Wan Shi Tong: (voice over) Your waterbending won't do you much good here. I've studied Northern Water Style, Southern Water Style, even Foggy Swamp Style.

(He raises his head and wings and prepares to attack.

Pan up to a shot of the hole in the ceiling where the rope is dangling. Light from the outside is pouring down. Aang flies across the screen on his glider, with Sokka holding on. Sokka lets go of the glider and falls down towards the camera, raising a large book above his head. Cut to a pan down shot of Sokka falling towards Wan Shi Tong. With a mighty cry, he brings the book down and smashes it against Wan Shi Tong's head. Sokka jumps off of Wan Shi Tong's head and off the screen. Katara quickly jumps out of the way as Wan Shi Tong wavers and falls forward. Cut to a shot of Sokka holding the book. Momo is hovering in the air to the right and Katara is smiling at her brother from the left. Many of Wan Shi Tong's feathers are floating around the area.)

Sokka: That's called Sokka style. (swings his fist to the side as he says this) Learn it!

(Cut to a shot from the side of Sokka, Katara and Momo, and the defeated spirit laying unconscious on the bridge. More streams of sand are pouring from above. Sokka climbs on top of Wan Shi Tong and begins climbing the rope. Katara follows after him. Aang glides past them. Cut to a close shot of Sokka climbing the rope. He stops and looks back down.)

Sokka: Wait! (cut to a shot from behind Zei, who is sitting between two bookshelves. Sokka, Katara and Momo can be seen climbing the rope in front of him) Professor, let's go!

(Sokka gestures for Zei to follow. Cut to a shot of Zei sitting between the bookshelves. He is surrounded by several dozen stacks of books on the floor. The sand is building up and beginning to some of the stacks. Zei is reading a scroll. The camera slowly zooms in.)

Professor Zei: I'm not leaving. I can't. (drops the parchment to his lap and raises his right fist) I've spent too long trying to find this place. (places his hand on his chest and looks up) There's not another collection of knowledge like this on Earth. (cut to a close up of Zei with his eyes closed. He opens his eyes and speaks wistfully) I could spend an eternity in here.

(Cut to a shot of Sokka and Katara looking at the professor. Katara looks up at Sokka.)

Katara: Just go!

(The rope begins swaying back and forth. Momo lets go of Katara and flies around them. Cut to a shot of Wan Shi Tong shrieking swinging the rope back and forth with his beak, trying to throw Sokka and Katara off it. Cut to a shot of Aang gliding down, then to Katara and Sokka both losing their grip and falling down. Aang swoops down and Katara grabs the tail of the glider. Sokka wraps his arms around Katara's waist. They fly past the screen, Momo following after.

Cut to a shot of Wan Shi Tong from behind whipping the rope around. Aang, Katara, Sokka and Momo can be seen flying off screen. Wan Shi Tong flaps his wings and flies after them. Cut to a shot of Aang from above as he carries his friends up the inside of the spire. Wan Shi Tong is seen flying behind them. The spirit begins to gain on Aang, Katara, Sokka and Momo. He tries to grab Sokka with his beak, but misses when Sokka pulls his feet up.

Outside, Toph is still holding the spire. The camera pans up and right to show Aang, Katara, Sokka and Momo escaping the library through the spire's window. Cut to a shot of Aang gracefully landing on the ground by bending the air. Katara and Sokka both land on the sand head first. The rope and Sokka's boomerang land next to Sokka. Aang looks left and right.

Cut to a shot of Toph's hands pressed against the spire. Her fingers are dug into it, and several cracks have formed. Toph grunts and pulls her fingers out. The spire immediately sinks quickly into the ground. Cut to a shot of Toph falling backward and the spire sinking. The sinking causes a dust cloud to form which envelops Toph. Toph shields herself.

Shift to a zoom out shot from above. Where the spire once stood is now a large crater. Cut to a shot of Aang kneeling on the ground. Behind him stands Sokka, holding a rolled up parchment, and Katara with Momo on her shoulder.)

Sokka: We got it. There's a solar eclipse coming. (Katara and Sokka jump at and hug each other. Momo jumps off of Katara's shoulder) The Fire Nation's in trouble, now!

(Aang stands up and walk towards the camera. He looks left and right before looking towards the screen. Cut to a shot from above of Aang and Toph. Toph is sitting on the ground with her head between her hands. Aang walks towards her.)

Aang: Where's Appa?

(Cut to a shot of Toph with her eyes closed. Aang, Sokka, Katara and Momo are standing behind her. She groans and shakes her head sadly. Cut to a close up of Aang from behind. The camera pans around him to show his face. His mouth hangs open, and watering eyes are wide with horror. Aang gasps as a tear rolls down his left cheek. Cut to a wide shot of the group standing beside the crater. The camera pans up to the sky. The bright sun shines into the camera, fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Camera pans an endless expanse of sand dunes and open sky. The wind blows loudly around them. As the view swings to the right, Momo, then Katara, then Sokka, Toph, and Aang come into view. Each looking in a different direction. Aang is clearly still angry, and Toph appears forlorn. Aang approaches Toph in an aggressive manner.)

Aang: (enraged) How could you let them take Appa Why didn't you stop them?!
Toph: I couldn't! The library was sinking! You guys were still inside and -(Toph swings her arms wide.)
Aang: You could have come to get us! I could have saved him!
Toph: I can hardly feel any vibrations out here. The sandbenders snuck upon me and there wasn't time for -
Aang: You just didn't care! You never liked Appa! You wanted him gone!

(Katara approaches the two in an attempt at peacemaking, and places an arm on Aang's left shoulder.)

Katara: Aang, stop it. You know Toph did all she could. She saved our lives.
Sokka: Who's going to save our lives now? We'll never make it out of here.

(Camera swings to Sokka, who turns towards the others and motions to the endless desert with an arm.)

Aang: That's all any of you guys care about: yourselves! You don't care whether Appa is okay or not! (Aang stalks off, sulking angrily.)
Katara: We're all concerned, but we can't afford to be fighting now.
Aang: I'm going after Appa.

(Aang flies off. Katara calls after him, running towards the spot from which he took off.)

Katara: Aang, wait!

(Cut to a view of the sky, with a view of the crater where the Library had been and Aang flying off.)

Katara: We'd better start walking. We're the only people who know about the solar eclipse. We have to get that information to Ba-Sing-Se.

(Camera, looking up towards the sun, returns to Katara, with Sokka visible to the right. The group wanders out into the desert.)

Sokka: You think if we dig out the giant owl, he'll give us a ride?

(Cut to Zuko and Iroh. Scene changes to a close up of a cactus growing in a clearly more lush environment. Camera swings to the right where we see Zuko and Iroh on their ostrich-horse riding through a small cleft in the valley. Iroh is clearly in discomfort.)

Zuko: Maybe we should make camp.
Iroh: (in a pained voice) No, please, don't stop for me!

(Iroh lets out several more pained groans. Zuko pulls the reigns of the Ostrich-Horse, stopping it. He and Iroh dismount. Iroh groans and takes a seat on a large flat rock. The Ostrich-Horse perks up, pricking its ears. Clearly, it detects something unusual. Zuko takes a defensive posture.)

Iroh: (annoyed) What now?

(Rough Rhinos streak through the foliage around them. Colonel Mongke's rhino stamps the ground forcefully, breaking the surface crust. Camera swings up to Cololonel Mongke pulling back on the rhino's reins. Zuko continues his defensive posture. Iroh brightens and places a hand on Zuko's shoulder.)

Iroh: Colonel Mongke! What a pleasant surprise!
Mongke: If you're surprised we're here then the Dragon of the West has lost a few steps.

(Mongke looks stern. He emphasizes his remarks by making sparks with his bracers. His men ready their weapons.)

Zuko: You know these guys?
Iroh: Sure. Colonel Mongke and the Rough Riders are legendary. Each one is a different kind of weapons specialist. They are also a very capable singing group.
Mongke: We're not here to give a concert. We're here to apprehend fugitives!
Iroh: Would you like some tea first? I'd love some. How about you, Kachi? I make you as a jasmine man. Am I right?
Mongke: Enough stalling! Round 'em up!

(The dark skinned, pony tailed fighter swings his ball and chain at Iroh. Iroh kicks the ball away. The ball, redirected, wraps its chain around the foot of another warrior's rhino. Iroh dodges the fire blasts by tumbling along the ground. He rises back up to swat the rump of the rhino that had been chained. The rhino runs off, yanking the dark-skinned warrior who had one end of the chain attached to his belt as well as its own rider. Iroh waves as he watches them go.

The archer shoots a lit arrow at Zuko's back. Zuko senses the arrow, turns, and breaks the arrow apart as it approaches him. Zuko then lets a fire blast loose, which burns a hole in the archer's bow, a hand's width above the archer's hand. The blast passes through the bow and breaks the string.

Mongke is seen letting loose fire blast after fire blast at Iroh. Iroh deflects each. Zuko runs up and jumps on the back of Mongke's rhino behind him. A brief duel ensues, with Mongke quickly being kicked off the rhino by Zuko.

Iroh runs up to the ostrich horse, jumps up on the saddle, and rides to Zuko. Zuko jumps from Mongke's rhino into the saddle as Iroh gallops by.

The armored warrior, riding in pursuit, throws a grenade at the fleeing ostrich horse. The grenade explodes ahead of the ostrich horse, but Iroh and Zuko are able to ride through the explosion.)

Iroh: It's nice to see old friends.
Zuko: Too bad you don't have any old friends that don't want to attack you.
Iroh: Hmm... Old friends that don't want to attack me...

(Cut to Katara, Sokka, and Toph. Katara is seen leading the rest of the crew, minus Aang and Appa, thought the desert. Occasional small plants dot the dunes. They are clearly hot, dry, and tired. Sokka tries using Momo and his wings as a hat. As he slows, Toph bumps into him, knocking Momo off Sokka's head.)

Sokka: (breathing hard) Can't you watch where you're -
Toph: No.
Sokka: Right. Sorry.

(Katara turns to encourage the others.)

Katara: Come on guys, we've got to stick together.
Sokka: If I sweat any more, I don't think sticking together will be a problem.

(Sokka tries to gently pull himself and Toph apart, but Toph cuts to the chase and knocks Sokka down, disconnecting them.)

Toph: Katara, can I have some water?
Katara: Okay, but we've got to try to conserve it.

(Katara bends water from her bag and suspends it between her and the others. She then directs it to each mouth except her own. Sokka swishes the water a bit, and then swallows with a face. He clearly is not impressed with the taste.)

Sokka: We're drinking your bending water? You used this on the swamp guy!
Toph: It does taste swampy.

(Cut to a shot of Momo smacking his lips before he lets out a displeased burp. Katara motions her sense of helplessness.)

Katara: I'm sorry, it's all we have.
Sokka: Not anymore! Look!

(Sokka makes a discovery, pointing to a large cactus a little off their path. He walks up to it, cuts a piece off with his knife, and drains the liquid content into his mouth. Momo does likewise.)

Katara: Sokka, wait! You shouldn't be eating strange plants! (Katara grabs Toph's wrist and runs over to Sokka and Momo.)
Sokka: There's water trapped inside these! (Sokka holds up some cactus for Katara, but she backs away, pushing Toph back as well.)
Katara: I don't know...
Sokka: Suit yourself. It's very thirst-quenching, though.

(The camera zooms in on Sokka's left eye. The pupil dilates rapidly. The camera backs away and we see Sokka's expression become blank. He shakes his head rapidly. The world then gets bizarre.)

Sokka: (In a strange, echoing voice) Drink cactus juice. It'll quench ya! Nothing's quenchier. (moves across the sand like an inch worm) It's the quenchiest!

(Katara takes the proffered cactus bowl and pours it to the ground.)

Katara: Okay, I think you've had enough.
Sokka: Who lit Toph on fire?

(Momo spins in a circle in the air and dive bombs to the ground.)

Toph: Can I get some of that cactus?
Katara: I don't think that's a good idea. Come on, we need to find Aang.
Sokka: How did we get out here in the middle of the ocean?
Katara: Uhhh...

(Cut to Aang, who flies across the desert on his glider and blows into the bison whistle. He glides down and lands on a dune.)

Aang: Appa! Appa! (Stares across the horizon but sees nothing)No... NO!

(Aang slams his staff into the sand, creating a large mushroom cloud of sand. Cut to a shot of the cloud from a distance as Katara, Sokka and Toph climb over a dune. Dust that was kicked up blows over them.)

Katara: What is that?
Toph: What? What is what?
Sokka: It's a giant mushroom! Maybe it's friendly!
Katara: Let's just keep moving. I hope Aang's okay...
Sokka: (in the echoing voice from before) Friendly mushroom!Mushy giant friend!

(Sokka waves his arms back and forth, and the music from the cactus juice scene begins playing.

Cut to the ice spring from the oasis seen in "The Library". The camera pans to the left, showing various people standing around the ice spring.)

Man: Yeah, a little barefoot blind girl and her friends passed through here a few days ago.
Master Yu: Did they give you any indication where they were headed?
Man: Maybe you could give me a little incentive?
Xin Fu: You suggesting I break your fingers?
Man: They went in the desert! Too bad there's almost no chance they survived.
Xin Fu: That's okay, since she's wanted dead or alive.
Master Yu: No she's not! I'm certain her father wants her alive.
Xin Fu: Hey, look... Fire Nation wanted posters!

(The camera changes to a view of several wanted posters on a bulletin board. The middle poster has an illustration of Zuko and Iroh.)

Master Yu: So -
Xin Fu: So, look who's here.

(Xin Fu turns his head to look at Zuko and Iroh as they walk towards a building.

Cut to Katara, Sokka, and Toph. It is now nearing sunset, and Katara, Sokka, Toph and Momo are still trekking across the desert. A shadow passes over head and Aang lands behind them, kicking up a small cloud of sand. Katara approaches him as he kneels.)

Katara: I'm sorry, Aang. I know it's hard for you right now, but we need to focus on getting out of here.
Aang: (hopelessly) What's the difference? We won't survive without Appa. We all know it.
Katara: Come on, Aang! We can do this if we work together. Right, Toph?
Toph: As far as I can feel, we're trapped in a giant bowl of sand pudding. I got nothin'.
Katara: Sokka? Any ideas how to find Ba-Sing-Se?

(Sokka and Momo are both lying on their backs and staring at the sky. Sokka smiles blissfully and points upward.)

Sokka: Why don't we ask the circle birds?

(Cut to a shot from below of several buzzard wasps circling above the group. Katara looks left and right at everyone. Aang is still sulking, and Toph staggers a bit.)

Katara: Ugh... We're getting out of this desert, and we're going to do it together! Aang, get up. Everybody hold hands. We can do this. We have to.

(Katara takes Aang's staff and leads him along. Aang holds on to Toph's hand, and Toph holds on to Sokka's hand. Sokka smiles and laughs as he pulls Momo along by the tail. Momo is trying to fly in the opposite direction. Shift to a shot from above as the group walks through the desert. A few buzzard wasps fly across the screen.

Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(Fade in to a shot of the sun setting behind an old, withered tree. Stars have appeared in the sky. The camera pans right and shows Katara leading the group over the top of a large dune.)

Katara: I think we should stop for the night.

(Everyone behind Katara sighs and falls to the ground.)

Toph: Is there any more water?
Katara: This is the last of it. Everyone can have a little drink.

(Katara opens her water flask and bends out an orb of water. Momo leaps at the water and tries to drink it, causing it to fall to the sand below. Sokka panics and scrambles towards the wet spot in the sand.)

Sokka: Momo, no! You've killed us all!
Katara: No, he hasn't.

(Katara places her hand over the moist sand and bends the water out of it.)

Sokka: Oh, right. Bending.

(Katara bends the water back into the flask and gives it to Toph.)

Katara: Sokka, let me see the things you got from the library.

(Sokka reels back and clutches his bag full of scrolls.)

Sokka: (offended) What! I didn't steal anything! Who told you that?! (pointing an accusing finger at Momo) It was you! You ratted me out!
Katara: Sokka, I was there. (takes Sokka's bag)
Aang: It doesn't matter. None of those will tell us where Appa is.

(Katara pulls out one of the scrolls and unrolls it, revealing a star map.)

Katara: No, but we can find out which way Ba-Sing-Se is. We can use the stars to guide us. That way we can travel at night when it's cool and rest during the day. (She sighs.) Just try to get some sleep. We'll start again in a few hours.

(Cut to Zuko and Iroh. The camera fades to inside the bar at the ice springs. Zuko and Iroh are sitting at a table.)

Zuko: No one here is going to help us. These people just look like filthy wanderers.
Iroh: So do we. (pointing) Ah, this is interesting. I think I've found our friend.

(The camera cuts to a pan left shot of an old, bald man sitting at a Pai Sho table.)

Zuko: You brought us here to gamble on Pai Sho?
Iroh:: I don't think this is a gamble.

(Iroh and Zuko get up and walk over. The camera closes in on Xin Fu and Master Yu sitting on a bench and watching the two fugitives.)

Xin Fu: Let's take them now!
Master Yu: This place is full of desperate characters. If they find out we're collecting a bounty, we might have to fight them all just to keep our prize. Patience.

(Cut to a shot of Iroh and Zuko approaching the Pai Sho table.)

Iroh: May I have this game?
Pai Sho Player: The guest has the first move. (Iroh places the lotus tile in the middle of the board) I see you favor the white lotus gambit. Not many still cling to the ancient ways.
Iroh: Those who do can always find a friend.
Pai Sho Player: Then let us play.

(The old PaiSho player places another tile on the board. Iroh quickly places another tile as well. Zuko sits down and watches intently as the two men place tile after tile on the board in rapid succession. When they are done, the tiles form the shape of a lotus, with the lotus tile in the center.)

Pai Sho Player: Welcome, brother. The White Lotus opens wide to those who know her secrets.
Zuko: What are you old gasbags talking about?
Iroh: I always tried to tell you that Pai Sho is more than just a game.

(Iroh rolls a tile over his knuckles and clutches it. Cut to a shot of Xin Fu and Master Yu.)

Xin Fu: I'm not waiting all night for these geezers to finish yapping! It's over! You two fugitives are coming with me!
Pai Sho Player: I knew it! You two are wanted criminals with a giant bounty on your heads!
Zuko: I thought you said he would help!
Iroh: He is. Just watch.
Pai Sho Player: You think you're going to capture them and collect all that gold?
Man in bar: Gold?

(All of the men in the bar look up at the mention of the word 'gold.' Several of them pull out knives and approach the group around the Pai Sho table.)

Master Yu: Uh... Maybe we shouldn't.

(Two men jump in front of Xin Fu. The earthbender spins around and delivers a reverse roundhouse kick, bending a rock from the ground which knocks the two men away. Master Yu enters his stance and bends the earth underneath one of the assailants, causing him to sink into the ground up to his neck.

Cut to a shot of Xin Fu handling a group of sandbenders. He has one lifted in the air with one hand and holds back another sandbender with the other hand. Xin Fu promptly kicks any other sandbender that comes near. He twists his waist and throws the two sandbenders he's holding. One goes flying and smashes into the wall behind the bartender.

Cut to a shot of Zuko, Iroh and the Pai Sho player running out of the building. Cut back to Xin Fu and Master Yu in their stances. They have both knocked out nearly everyone in the bar, but have let their bounty escape. Xin Fu growls and punches both of his fists downward, causing a pillar of rock to shoot out from under one of the downed sandbenders. He yells as he flies through the window and hits a palm tree.

Cut to Aang's group. The camera pans left to the group sleeping on a dune. Momo is burying the dreaming Sokka under the sand and patting it down. Momo jump away as Katara approaches Sokka to wake him up.)

Katara: Come on, get up. We need to go.

(Sokka drowsily sits up. Toph sits up and smacks her lips.)

Toph: Yesterday my mouth tasted like mud. Now it just tastes like sand. I never thought I'd miss the taste of mud so much.

(Katara goes to wake Aang up, but he interrupts her before she can touch him.)

Aang: I'm awake. I couldn't sleep.
Katara: Well, we need to get moving if we want to get out of this sand pit.

(Aang and Katara spot something in the sky. Cut to a shot of a large, bison shaped object floating past the large, bright moon.)

Aang: (joyfully) Appa!
Sokka: Appa? But why would Princess Yue need him? She's the moon! She flies by herself!

(A closer look at what was thought to be Appa reveals it to be nothing more than cloud.)

Katara: (sadly) It's just a cloud. Wait! A cloud! (To Aang Here, fly up and bend the water from that cloud into my pouch.

(Aang gives Katara an angry look before snatching her water pouch and taking off on his glider. In two passes, Aang quickly collects the cloud moisture. He throws the pouch down to Katara and lands. Katara peeks into the pouch.)

Katara: Wow... there's hardly any in here.
Aang: (angrily) I'm sorry, okay! It's a desert cloud; I did all I could! What's anyone else doing! What are you doing?

(Aang points his staff at Katara. She looks back with shock.)

Katara: Trying to keep everyone together. Let's just get moving. We need to head in this direction.

(Katara begins reading the star map and continues to lead the group. After a few moments of walking, Toph suddenly trips and falls. She rubs her stubbed foot. Next to her is a wooden object sticking out of the sand.)

Toph: Ow! Crud! I am so sick of not feeling where I'm going! And what idiot buried a boat in the middle of the desert?!
Katara: A boat?
Toph: Believe me, I kicked it hard enough to feel plenty of vibrations.

(Sokka sighs as Aang steps forward and swings his staff in a wide, horizontal arc, kicking up sand. When it clears, a sand glider like the ones used by the sandbenders is seen.)

Katara: It's one of the gliders the sandbenders use! And look! It's got some kind of compass on it! I bet it can point us out of here! Aang, you can bend a breeze so we can sail it. We're going to make it!

(Everyone turns to see Sokka laughing and as he buries Momo in a pile of sand. He turns towards the others and gives two thumbs up as well as a large grin.

Cut to Zuko and Iroh.

Fade to a shot of a small village near the edge of the desert. Zuko, Iroh and the Pai Sho player from the ice springs enter one of the buildings. The Pai Sho player makes sure than no one is watching before shutting the door. Inside it becomes apparent that the building is a flower shop.)

Pai Sho Player: It is an honor to welcome such a high-ranking member of the Order of the White Lotus. Being a Grand Master, you must know so many secrets.
Zuko: Now that you played Pai Sho,are you going to do some flower arranging, or is this club going to offer some real help?
Iroh: You must forgive my nephew. He is not an initiate and has little appreciation for the cryptic arts.

(The Pai Sho player knocks on a door in the back. A small window in the middle slides open and a man peeks through.)

Doorman: Who knocks at the guarded gate?
Iroh: One who has eaten the fruit and tasted its mysteries.

(The door is opened and Iroh and the Pai Sho player enter. Zuko attempts to follow them, but the door is shut in his face. Iroh slides open the door's window.)

Iroh: I'm afraid it's members only. Wait out here.

(Zuko frowns and crosses his arms. He leans over to a nearby plant and sniffs it.)

Cut to Aang and company. Fade to a shot from above of the sand glider racing through the desert. Aang is driving it forwards by bending powerful gusts of air into the sail. Katara is standing on the upper platform and navigating using the compass and star map.)

Katara: The needle on this compass doesn't seem to be pointing north according to my charts.
Sokka: (dreamily) Take it easy little lady. I'm sure the sand folks who built this baby know how to get around here.

(Sokka is sitting behind Katara and holding Momo by the tail. Katara gasps when she sees a giant rock sticking out from the sand in the distance.)

Katara: (gasps) That's what the compass is pointing to! That giant rock! It must be the magnetic center of the desert.
Toph: (happily) A rock? Yes! Let's go!
Katara: Maybe we can find some water there!
Aang: (darkly) Maybe we can find some sandbenders.

(Fade to a shot of the sand glider at the foot of the rock. It is now dawn and the sun brightens part of the sky. The camera rotates up to a view of Aang and the group reaching the top of the rock.)

Toph: Ahhh... Finally! Solid ground!

(Toph falls flat on her back and moves her arms and legs back and forth, creating an earth angel in the rock surface. Cut to a shot from above. The camera zooms out and several strange, round caves can be seen. Shift to a shot from the inside of one of these caves as the group enters it. Covered all around the cave's surface is a yellow,
gooey substance that looks like honey.)

Sokka: (breathes deeply) I think my head is starting to clear out the cactus juice. And look!

(Sokka grabs some of the sticky substance and he and Momo eat it. He quickly spits it out and makes a disgusted gagging noise.)

Sokka: This tastes like rotten penguin meat! Awww I feel woozy.
Katara: (irritated) You've been hallucinating on cactus juice all day and then you just lick something you find stuck to the wall of a cave?!
Sokka: I have a natural curiosity.
Toph: I don't think this is a normal cave. This was carved by something.
Aang: Yeah... look at the shape.
Toph: There's something buzzing in here. Something that's coming for us!

(The camera cuts to a view of everyone running back out of the cave as a buzzing noise is heard. The camera zooms out to reveal a large domed structure which resembles a hive carved from the rock. Toph and Aang scream as buzzard wasps fly from the caves and attack. A buzzard wasp lunges at the camera.

Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(Fade in to a shot of the giant rock. Change to a shot of the buzzard wasp hive at the top. Several of the creatures emerge from the cave and begin flying above and screeching. Aang swings his staff down at one that approaches and blows it back with a gust of air. A buzzard wasp lands near Toph. She senses it and bends a pillar of rock up from beneath it, sending it flying.

Another buzzard wasp flies between Toph and Sokka. Toph stomps the ground and pops a boulder into the air. She lifts it and smashes it down inches away from Sokka.)

Sokka: What are you doing?! That rock almost crushed me!
Toph: Sorry, I can't tell where they are in the air!

(A buzzard wasp flies past them.)

Sokka: I got this one.

(Cut to a shot of Sokka swinging his machete wildly back and forth.)

Katara: Sokka, there's nothing there.

(The camera zooms out to show Sokka looking back and forth, realizing he's been attacking the air.)

Sokka: I guess my head's not as clear as I thought.
Katara: We have to get out of here! I'm completely out of water to bend!

(The camera cuts to a shot of Momo crouching on the ground behind Aang and Katara. He is suddenly snatched by a buzzard wasp. Aang watches as the wasp flies towards the rising sun with the winged lemur.)

Aang: Momo! I'm not losing anyone else out here.

(Aang opens his glider and takes off after the buzzard wasp.)

Katara: Come on, we're going down.

(Cut to a shot of the giant rock's wall. Buzzard wasps are flying everywhere. The camera rotates down to a view of Sokka, Katara and Toph making their way down on a narrow ledge. Katara places her hands on Toph's shoulders and turns her to face the buzzard wasps.)

Katara:Toph, shoot a rock right there. Fire!

(Toph stomps down and pops a cluster of rocks into the air before shooting them forward with a double palm strike. The rocks make a direct hit with the buzzard wasp.)

Sokka: Yeah! You got it! She got it, right?
Katara: Yes. Now let's move.

(Shift to Aang chasing the buzzard wasp that has captured Momo. He flies underneath it and rolls over, bending a gust of wind with a strong kick that forces the buzzard wasp to let go of Momo. Momo begins to fall, but quickly gains control and flies next to Aang. Aang glares as the Buzzard wasp tries to fly away. He glides close to the ground and closes his glider. Still flying forward, Aang swings his staff down and shoot a powerful blade of air that splits the sand. The buzzard wasp, now just a black dot against the sun, is hit by the attack, cutting it in two. It falls from the air and hits the sand with a dull thud. Aang stares coldly and walks back to the giant rock. Momo follows, but is clearly frightened by Aang's merciless act.

Cut back to Katara, Sokka and Toph nearing the bottom. Katara turns to the camera.)

Katara: On your left!

(Toph smacks a rock and shoots it at another buzzard wasp, which shrieks on impact. The camera cuts and zooms out to a wide shot of buzzard wasps hovering around the foot of the rock and the sand glider. Suddenly, gigantic pillars of sand burst upwards, scaring of the swarm of wasps. They fly upward and back to their hive. Sokka, Katara, and Toph all shield their eyes. When they open them, several sandbenders are surrounding them. The camera pans over them and their gliders. Shift back to Katara, Sokka and Toph as Aang lands in front of them, ready to face the sandbenders.

The scene changes to a shot of the flower shop. Cut to Zuko inside, who appears to have fallen asleep while waiting. The door opens and Iroh steps out, causing Zuko to awaken and go into a defensive stance.)

Zuko: What's going on? Is the club meeting over?
Iroh: Everything is taken care of. We're heading to Ba-Sing-Se.
Zuko: Ba-Sing-Se? Why would we go to the Earth Kingdom capital?
Pai Sho Player: The city is filled with refugees. No one will notice two more.
Iroh: We can hide in plain sight there. And it's the safest place in the world from the Fire Nation. Even I couldn't break through to the city.

(The door opens and a man steps inside the flower shop.)

White Lotus Member: I have the passports for our guests, but there are two men out on the streets looking for them.

(Cut to a shot of Xin Fu and Master Yu standing outside from behind the small window in the door. Xin Fu holds up a wanted poster to a man walking by.)

Xin Fu: You seen these guys?

(The camera zooms out to show Iroh and Zuko looking through the window. They turn to each other and give each other questioning looks.

Cut to Aang and the gang. The leader of the sandbenders, a bald man with a beard confronts Aang, Katara, Sokka and Toph.)

Sha-Mo: What are you doing in our land with a sandbender sailer? From the looks of it, you stole it from the Hami tribe.
Katara: We found the sailer abandoned in the desert. We're traveling with the Avatar. Our bison was stolen and we have to get to Ba-Sing-Se.

(A younger sandbender next to the leader steps forward and raises his voice and clenches his fist.)

Sandbender #1: You dare accuse our people of theft while you ride in on a stolen sand sailer?

(Cut to a close up of Toph's eye narrowing when she hears the young sandbender's voice.)

Sha-Mo: Quiet, Gashuin. No one accused our people of anything. If what they say is true, we must give them hospitality.
Gashuin: Sorry, father.

(Toph's eye widens upon realization of who the young sandbender is.)

Toph: I recognize the son's voice. He's the one that stole Appa.
Katara: Are you sure?
Toph: I never forget a voice.

(Aang takes several steps towards the sandbenders and brandishes his staff threateningly.)

Aang: (angrily) You stole Appa! Where is he What did you do to him
Gashuin: They're lying! They're the thieves!

(Aang swings his staff down and obliterates a sand sailer with a blast of air.)

Aang: Where is my bison?!

(The scene changes to outside the flower shop Iroh and Zuko had stayed in. Out of the door steps a man pulling a small wood wagon with two large flower pots on it. After he leaves, Xin Fu and Master Yu approach the door. Cut to the interior of the flower shop as Xin Fu burst the door open. This causes a flower pot hanging overhead to fall and shatter. Xin Fu holds up the wanted poster to the florist tending the plants.)

Xin Fu: Hey you, where are these men? I got a tip that they're in your shop.
Florist: (calmly) As you can see, no one is here but us.
Master Yu: We know all about your secret back room. (to Xin Fu) Kick it down.
Florist: Hey! That room is for flowers only!

(Xin Fu runs at the door and slams his foot into it, knocking down the whole doorframe and the stone around it. Xin Fu and Master Yu discover the room to be empty, save for a circle of mats and a Pai Sho lotus tile in the middle. Master Yu picks up the lotus tile.)

Master Yu: Some unlucky soul has an incomplete Pai Sho set.
Xin Fu: (Growls angrily and knocks the tile out of Master Yu's hand) Let's go back to finding the girl.

(The scene changes to the man with the wagon pulling the two large pots over some sand dunes just outside the village. From under the flowers in the two pots, Zuko and Iroh poke their heads out and take a brief look around before sinking back into their hiding spots.

Cut to Aang and the others. The scene changes to Aang and the sandbenders.)

Aang: You tell me where he is now!

(The sandbenders watch in shock as Aang swings the end of his staff upward and destroys another sand sailer.)

Sha-Mo: (To Gashuin) What did you do?
Gashuin: I-It wasn't me!
Toph: You said to put a muzzle on him!
Aang: (enraged) You muzzled Appa?!

(Aang's eyes and arrow glow as he begins to enter the Avatar State. He twirls his staff around and demolishes one of the few remaining sand sailers.)

Gashuin: I'm sorry! I didn't know that it belonged to the Avatar!
Aang: (In an unearthly voice) Tell me where Appa is!
Gashuin: (frightened) I traded him! To some merchants! He's probably in Ba-Sing-Se by now! They were going to sell him there! Please! We'll escort you out of the desert! We'll help however we can!

(The air around Aang slowly begins to pick up and spin around Aang as he fully enters the Avatar State, pulling in sand and creating a small tornado.)

Sokka: Just get out of here! Run!

(Sokka grabs Toph by the shoulders and pulls her away from Aang. Toph, Sokka, Momo and the sandbenders all flee for their lives. Katara, however, stays and faces the danger. The sand tornado grows larger and spreads quickly as Aang slowly lifts from the ground. Katara makes her way through the fierce wind and grabs Aang's wrist. He looks down at her with anger and hate, but is only met with Katara's sad expression. Katara brings Aang back to the ground and hugs him by the shoulders. Sokka and Toph bring their hands down from shielding themselves as the wind becomes less violent. Tears are streaming from Aang's glowing eyes, and Katara is doing her best not to let go of him. The wind finally dies down. Aang leaves the Avatar State and lets his head rest against Katara. The screen fades to white.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence, including clips from "The Desert", "Avatar Day", "The Warriors of Kyoshi", "Jet", and "The Library".]



Act I

(The Scene opens in a box canyon on a peaceful sunny afternoon. A waterfall cascades into a deep pool, and we see Aang and company enjoying some off-time. Sokka is sitting on a rock studying a scroll while Momo observes from his shoulder. Toph splashes her feet from the pool's edgel, while Aang swims on his back. Aang encases his body in a block of ice, floating along peacefully. The cameral pans up to the highest point in the canyon, as Katara prepares to dive off).

Katara: Waterbending bomb! Yeah!

(Katara performs a tumbling cannonball into the pool. She sends up a massive column of water that washes Aang ashore, shattering his ice block. As water drenches them all, Toph and Aang laugh with delight.)

Sokka: (holding out dripping map) Sure, 5000 year old maps from the spirit library, just splash some water on 'em.
Katara: Sorry.

(Katara emerges from the pool as she says this, wringing water out of her hair. She then uses a waterbending technique to draw the water out of the map Sokka is holding up. Everyone gathers around as Sokka spreads the map out on the ground.

Aang: So, did you figure out what routewe're gonna take?
Sokka: (pointing out map features) Okay. We just got out of the desert, so we must be around here, and we need to go to Ba Sing Se, which is here. It looks like the only passage connecting the South to the North is this sliver of land called the Serpent's Pass.
Toph: You're sure that's the best way to go?
Sokka: It's the only way, I mean it's not like we have Appa to fly us there.
Katara: (in a hushed voice) Shush up about Appa. Can't you at least try to be sensitive? (Sokka and Katara glance up at Aang)
Aang: (calmly) Katara, it's ok. I know I was upset about losing Appa before, but I just want to focus on getting to Ba Sing Se, and telling the Earth King about the solar eclipse.
Katara: (surprised) Oh, well, ok. I'm glad you're doing better.
Sokka: (rolling map) Then to Ba Sing Se we go, no more distractions.

(Just as Sokka finishes saying this, a trio of Earth kingdom civilians appear in the background.)

Than: (calling out) Hello there fellow refugees!

(In a closer shot, we see a waving young man in his twenties, a very pregnant young woman and a teen-aged girl. Sokka expression changes to consternation. Scene switches to both groups gathered in conversation.)

Aang: So, are you guys headed to Ba Sing Se too?
Than: Sure are, we're trying to get there before my wifeYing has her baby. (rubs her large belly)
Katara: Great, we can travel through the Serpent's Pass together. (the three travelers react with horror.)
Ying: (fearfully) The Serpent's Pass?! Only the truly desperate take that deadly route.
Toph: Deadly route. (whacks Sokka's arm painfully) Great pick, Sokka.
Sokka: Well, we are desperate.
Than: You should come with us to Full Moon Bay. Ferries take refugees across the lake. It's the fastest way to Ba Sing Se.
Ying: And it's hidden, so the Fire Nation can't find it.
Katara: (sarcastically) Hmmm, peaceful ferry ride...or deadly pass?

(Cut to a gloomy cavernous inlet; Full Moon Ferry Landing, where three large wooden ships are anchored past a fortified wall. Behind the harbor wall hundreds of people have gathered on a stone landing. Cut to two earth nation guards standing at attention. One of them bends down a wall section behind them, revealing a hidden tunnel. Our heroes and their new traveling companions emerge from the tunnel. A view over Katara's shoulder shows the crowd of refugees.)

Katara: I can't believe how many people's lives have been uprooted by the Fire Nation. (cuts to a scene of refugee camp, showing a woman feeding a crying child)
Tahn: (voice over) We're all looking for a better life. Safe, behind the walls of Ba Sing Se.

(Cut back to the three ships, lying side by side, as the center vessel launches. It emerges from the inlet and out onto the great lake. Cuts to show a close-up of Iroh, standing on the ship's deck and looking out at the water.)

Iroh: (solemnly) Who would have thought, after all these years, I'd return to the scene of my greatest military disgrace...as a tourist (as he says this last bit, he turns to Zuko, putting on a flowered straw hat and a wide grin)
Zuko: (grimly) Look around, we're not tourists, we're refugees. (sips from wooden bowl) Ugh! (spits over railing) I'm sick of eating rotten food, sleeping in the dirt... I'm tired of living like this.

(Zuko leans on the rail despondently.)

Jet: Aren't we all? (camera pans to show a stalk of prairie grass, leading to the silhouette of Jet's face as he adopts a sly grin) My name's Jet, and these are my freedom fighters, Smellerbee, and Longshot.

(Jet steps out toward the rail, his companions behind him.)

Smellerbee: Hey. (Longshot nods a greeting)
Zuko: (looking out over lake) Hello.
Jet: (stepping closer) Here's the deal. I hear the Captain's eating like a king, while us refugees have to feed off his scraps. Doesn't seem fair, does it?
Iroh: What sort of "king" is he eating like?
Jet: The fat, happy kind. (Iroh's mouth gapes open, drooling) You want to help us "liberate" some food?

(Zuko stares down into at the bowl of gruel, considering a moment before hurling it out over the rail.)

Zuko: (turns) I'm in.

(Cuts back to the Ferry Landing, where an cruel-looking Earth kingdom woman stands at a podium, stamping papers.)

Bureaucrat: (angrily) I've told you already, no vegetables on the ferry! (A familiar old man looks up in desperate denial) One cabbage slug could destroy the entire ecosystem of Ba Sing Se. Security! (points offscreen)
Cabbage Merchant: (horrified) Dah! My Cabbages!!

(As he says this an enormous platypus-bear, dressed in a uniform, rears up and destroys his goods, cart and all. The merchant falls to his knees, paralyzed in despair. Two guards pick him up by the arms and carry him away past Aang and friends.)

Bureaucrat: (stampingpaper) Next!
Aang: (hesitantly) Um, four tickets for the ferry to Ba Sing Se, please.
Bureaucrat: Passport.
Aang: Uh, no one told us we had to have passports.
Sokka: (stepping forward) Don't you know who this is? He's the Avatar!
Bureaucrat: (unimpressed) Ah, I see fifty Avatars a day, and by the way, not a very impressive costume.

(She points over the the left, showing a motley group of boys in avatar costumes lounging together. Aang smiles and nods in their direction, as Momo jumps up on his shoulder.)

Bureaucrat: Besides, no animals allowed. (threateningly) Do I need to call security?

(Cut to platypus bear chomping a cabbage, back to Momo cowering on Aang's shoulder.)

Aang: (holds up hands) That won't be necessary.
Bureaucrat: Next!
Toph: (strides forward) I'll take care of this. My name is Toph Bei Fong, and I'll need 4 tickets.

(Toph pushes up a document bearing a gleaming golden emblem.)

Bureaucrat: (awed) Oh! The Golden Seal of the Flying Boar, it is my pleasure to help anyone of the Bei Fong family. (The Bureaucrat bows with a flourish.)
Toph: (arrogantly) It is your pleasure. As you can see I am blind, and these three imbeciles are my valets.

(She gestures back to the others, who are grinning foolishly in a group hug.)

Bureaucrat: (hesitantly) But the animal ...
Toph: Is my Seeing-Eye Lemur. (Momo hops up on her shoulder.)
Bureaucrat: Well, normally it's only 1 ticket per passport, but, this document is so official, I guess it's worth 4 tickets.

(She rapidly stamps four papers.)

Toph: Thank you very much.

(She reaches up and gathers them off podium, then walks off.)

Sokka: (in file behind the others) Alright, we scammed that lady good!

(Sokka is grabbed from behind and spun around by an attractive young woman in Earth kingdom uniform.)

Suki: (firmly) Tickets and passports please. (holds out hand)
Sokka: (intimidated) Is there a problem?
Suki: (menacingly) Yeah, I've got a problem with you. (pokes
finger at his chest) I've seen your type before, probably sarcastic, think your hilarious, and let me guess, you're traveling with the Avatar.
Sokka: (eyes narrowing) Do I know you?
Suki: You mean you don't remember? (yanks him close by his collar) Maybe you remember this. (She places a kiss on his cheek.)
Sokka: Suki!! (They hug.)
Suki: (delighted) Sokka, it's good to see you!

(Cut to a covered tower on the harbor wall, overlooking both the landing and the harbor. Suki and the heroes continue their reunion inside.)

Katara: You look so different without your makeup, and the new outfit.
Suki: That crabby lady makes all the security guards wear them. And look at you sleeveless guy. Been working out? (looks at Sokka approvingly)
Sokka: I'll grab a tree branch and do a few chin touches every now and then, nothing major. (stretches and flexes casually, pats his bicep)
Aang: Are the other Kyoshi warriors around?
Suki: Yeah, after you left Kyoshi, we wanted to find a way to help people. We ended up escorting some refugees, and we've been here ever since. (looks out over refugee camp, as Momo jumps up next to her) Hi Momo, good to see you too. (scratches his ear) So why are you guys getting tickets for the ferry? Wouldn't you just fly across on Appa? (everyone else suddenly looks down)
Katara: (sadly) Appa is missing. We hope to find him in Ba Sing Se. (she looks over at Aang, who looks away)
Suki: I'm so sorry to hear that. (looks at Aang with concern) Are you doing okay? (everyone now looks to him)
Aang: (annoyed) I'm doing fine. Would everybody stop worrying about me!
Ying: (from below) Avatar Aang, you have to help us! Someone took all of our belongings. Our passports, our tickets. Everything's gone!

(We see Than and family standing at the tower's base. Ying begins to cry as Than comforts her.)

Aang: (calling down to them) I'll talk to the lady for you.

(Scene abruptly cuts to bureaucrat's scowling face.)

Bureaucrat: No passports, no tickets!! (stamps the arrow on Aang's brow)
Aang: (pleading) But she's pregnant, and all of their stuff was stolen. You have to make an exception.
Bureaucrat: (shouting) No exceptions! If I just gave away tickets willy nilly to anyone, there would be no more order, and you know what that means. No more civilization!
Aang: What if we gave them our tickets?
Bureaucrat: No!
Aang: But...
Bureaucrat: (spraying spittle onto Aang) NEXT!!!

(Well back from the podium, Aang walks back to the waiting Than and family.)

Aang: (reassuringly) Don't worry, you'll get to the city safely. I'll lead you through the serpents pass.

(Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(Scene opens to show a second ferry emerging out from the hidden inlet. Cuts to show Aang leading his friends and Than's family through the refugee camp.)

Sokka: I can't believe we gave up our tickets, and now we're going through the Serpent's Pass.
Toph: I can't believe you're still complaining about it.
Suki: I'm coming too. (she rushes to catch up to group, clad in her Kyoshi's warrior garb and makeup)
Sokka: (cautiously)Are you sure that's a good idea?
Suki: (surprised) Sokka, I thought you'd want me to come?
Sokka: I do, it's just...
Suki: (growingannoyed) Just what?
Sokka: Nothing. I'm glad you're coming. (Suki walks past him angrily, Sokka looks down and then follows)

(Cut to an aerial view of the lake showing the Serpent's Pass, a narrow sliver of land extending out across the great lake.)

Sokka: (voiceover) This is the Serpent's Pass I thought it would be more windy, you know, like a serpent. Hmm, I guess they misnamed it.

(Camera pans at the beginning of the pass to show everyone gathered at a large wooden oriental archway, the pass rising straight and steep beyond.)

Ying: (approaching gatepost) Look at this writing, how awful.
Toph: What does it say?
Katara: (stepping forward, reads) It says, "Abandon hope".
Ying: (miserably) How could we abandon hope? It's all we have. (buries face in husband's chest)
Aang: (evenly) I don't know. The monks used to say that hope is just a distraction. So maybe we do need to abandon it.
Katara: (incredulous) What are you talking about?
Aang: Hope isn't going to get us into Ba Sing Se, and it's not gonna find Appa. We need to focus on what we're doing right now, and that's getting across this pass. (steps through gate)
Katara: (somberly) Ok, if you say so. (everyone begins to follow Aang through the gateway)

(We see the pass from the side, a narrow sliver of peaks rising jaggedly from the water. Seen from the air, the group walks single-file along a perilously narrow path high along the cliff face.)

Suki: The fire nation controls the western lake. Rumor has it they're working on something big on the other side, and they don't want anyone to find out what it is.

(As she speaks, a Fire nation war vessel is noticed cruising off in the distance. Everyone glances at it nervously as slowly patrols alongside. Suddenly the path gives way underneath Than, who is caught by a quick earthbending move from Toph. Her rock protrusion flips him back to the path and into his family's arms.)

Than: (calling out) I'm okay.

(Cuts back to show the piece of pathway tumbling to splash into the lake. The passing warship suddenly launches an attack towards them from its deck catapult.)

Sokka: (shouting) They've spotted us! Let's go, let's go!

(Aang leaps up and launches off of the cliff face, toward the fiery projectile. Intercepting it in the air, he sends it arcing back with a sweep of his staff to crash among the warship's smokestacks. As the ship catches fire, it launches another attack from its second catapult. This one impacts into the cliff side above, and Sokka shoves Suki forward as rocks tumble down toward them. Toph turns and bends out an awning of stone to divert the rocks away from Sokka. Realizing he is safe, Sokka rushes forward to gather up the prone Suki.)

Sokka: Suki, are you ok You have to be more careful! (leads her past Toph) C'mon!
Toph: (muttering) Thanks for saving my life Toph. Hey no problem Sokka.

(Toph turns and races after the others, as Aang kites in behind her. We see the Fire nation warship burning on the lake, then cut to a sunset view of Serpent's Pass disappearing over the horizon.

Cut once more to a fire-lit camp on the pass, as everyone prepares to turn in. Than is rubbing Ying's feet as she lays propped up, and Suki begins spreading out her bedroll.)

Sokka: Suki, you shouldn't sleep there. (walks up and takes bedroll) Who knows how stable this ledge is? It could give way at any moment.
Suki: (calls after him) Sokka, I'm fine. Stop worrying!
Sokka: (laying bedroll near his) You're right, you're right. You're perfectly capable of taking care of yourself...Wait! (abruptly leaps between her and bedroll) Oh, never mind. I thought I saw a spider, but you're fine. (pats Suki's shoulder reassuringly, while she looks mortified)

(Cut to Earth kingdom ferry cruising beneath a moon-lit sky, then to the upper deck. As a guard passes by with a lantern, Zuko stealthily leads Jet and Smellerbee upstairs and around corner. They pause to look in kitchen window, then slip around back. Jet forces the lock while Smellerbee keeps watch, then the Zuko and Jet burst into kitchen. Jet sweeps several hanging bird carcasses into a sack. The prince uses his swords to nimbly stack eight bowls of food together, securing the stack with a ribbon. Both shoulder their sacks and turn to the doorway.)

Smellerbee: (whispering) Guards coming!

(The three of them rush to the balcony edge, while below, Longshot fires a line-strung arrow into the railing. Both bundles slide down the line, followed by the three sneak-thieves. The arrow is pulled free just as another lantern-bearing guard walks past. Panning down two levels to the main deck we see the three steal away safely.

Cutting back to the Serpent's Pass Camp, we find Aang standing out on a dark outcropping, staring out across the lake. Katara walks out to stand a few paces behind him.)

Katara: You know, it's o.k. to miss Appa. What's going on with you? In the desert, all you cared about was finding Appa, and now it's like you don't care about him at all. (walks up beside him)
Aang: You saw what I did out there. I was so angry about losing Appa, I couldn't control myself. I hated feeling like that.
Katara: But now you're not letting yourself feel anything. I know sometimes it hurts more to hope, and it hurts more to care. But you have to promise me that you won't stop caring. C'mon, you need ahug. (She holds out her arms to him, but he bows politely to her)
Aang: Thank you for your concern Katara. (He walks away, Katara watching him leave with a worried look)

(Cut to Sokka staring up at the moon,as clouds begin to pass before it. He is seated below a small stone arch, and Suki quietly walks up to stand next to him.)

Suki: (softly) It's a beautiful moon.
Sokka: Yeah, it really is.
Suki: (sitting close) Look, I know you're just trying to help, but I can take care of myself.
Sokka: I know you can.
Suki: Then why are you acting so over protective?
Sokka: It's so hard to lose someone you care about. (looks away) Something happened at the North Pole, and I couldn't protect someone. I don't want anything like that to ever happen again.
Suki: (thoughtfully) I lost someone I cared about. He didn't die, he just went away. I only had a few days to get to know him, but he was smart, and brave, and funny. (Sokka begins to look worried)
Sokka: (indignantly) Who is this guy? Is he taller than me? (rises to his feet)
Suki: (coyly) No, he's about your height.
Sokka: Is he better looking?
Suki: It is you stupid!
Sokka: Oh... (looks to her wistfully)

(They draw close to kiss, eyes closed, the bright moon hanging between them. Just before their lips meet, Sokka looks away with a pained expression.)

Sokka: I can't.
Suki: I'm... sorry.
Sokka: (turning away) No, you shouldn't be. (leaves her standing beneath arch)

(Cut to the Ferry, passing below us, then the main deck as Jet passes out food to the thankful passengers. In the next scene, Iroh and Zuko sit eating with Longshot and Smellerbee.)

Iroh: So, Smellerbee, that's an unusual name for a young man.
Smellerbee: (peeved) Maybe it's because I'm not a man. I'm a girl! (shoots Iroh a look, rises and walks off)
Iroh: (calling after her) Oh, now I see! It's a beautiful name for a lovely girl!

(Longshot quickly rises and follows,catching Smellerbee with a hand to her shoulder. He steps in front of her, giving her a hard look.)

Smellerbee: (contrite) I know. You're right. As long as I'm confident with who I am, it doesn't matter what other people think. Thanks Longshot. (he nods a stern approval)

(Zuko and Iroh are joined by Jet, who calmlt sits down with them.)

Jet: (eagerly) From what I heard, people eat like this every night in Ba Sing Se. I can't wait to set my eyes on that giant wall.
Iroh: It is a magnificent sight.
Jet: So you've been there before?
Iroh: Once, when I was a different man. (looks away with regret)
Jet: (glancing around) I've done some things in my past that I'm not proud of. But that's why I'm going to Ba Sing Se, for a new beginning. A second chance.
Iroh: That's very noble of you. I believe people can change their lives if they want to. I believe in second chances. (shares a meaningful look with Zuko, while Jet studies them both)

(Cut to a far view of the twisting Serpent's Pass, panning to follow its winding course across the lake. Ang leads the party down a steep slope. The group stops as the path abruptly drops off into the lake, disappearing then reemerging several hundred yards distant. Everyone stands stunned until Katara strides forward resolutely.)

Katara: Everyone single file.

(Bending aside the water in her path, Katara descends down below the water level, lifting up walls of water to either side. As everyone falls in behind her, a capsule of air forms around them.)

Katara: Aang, I need help. (smiling, he hands staff to Toph and begins bending)

(Than and his family stare about amazed as they travel under the waves. Momo, perched on Toph's shoulder notices a school of fish passing by, and plunges through the water-wall after them. Suki and Sokka turn to see Momo swimming in pursuit. Suddenly, a massive black form passes near Momo, sending him leaping back to Toph, to cower dripping wet on her shoulder.

The enormous bulk of the creature passes over the bubble, and is dimly seen from within.)

Katara: What is that thing?

(As Ying and her family huddle in fear, something huge crashes through the walls of the bubble, breaking Katara's concentration and threatening to drown them all. Reacting quickly, Toph bends up a column of rock that rushes everyone to the surface. Toph hands back Aang's staff back just as the others notice a long spiny dorsal fin circling their sanctuary. Everyone watches it with growing dread, until the head of a colossal monster explodes from the lake. It is a gigantic jade Sea Serpent, whiskered head resembling a seahorse's, long tongue lashing whip like from its maw. The monster roars deafeningly as it rears back its long neck to menace our heroes.)

Sokka: (pointing upward) I think I just figured out why they call it the Serpent's Pass.

(A final close-up of the Serpent's gaping toothy jaws, from which issues a shrill scream of rage. Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(Scene opens back to the titanic Serpent arching menacingly over our circle of heroes)

Sokka: Suki, you know about giant sea monsters. Make it go away!
Suki: (angrily) Just because I live near the Unagi doesn't mean I'm an expert!
Sokka: (beseechingly holds up Momo) Oh great and powerful sea serpent, please accept this humble and tasty offering. Thank you.
Katara: (outraged) Sokka!

(The Serpent lunges toward them, but Aang sweeps an arc of wind at its head, punching it backwards.)

Aang: I'll distract him. Katara, get everyone across.

(Aang opens his flyer and swoops off as the serpent recovers and snakes after him. Katara begins casting a path made of ice across the lake surface, running forward to connect it to the far shore. Urging the others past her, Katara watches Aang elude the serpent in the distance. She hops onto the water, forms a pontoon of ice around her feet, and propels herself toward the fight.

When Aang races past her, the enraged Serpent close behind, she begins to freeze ice around the passing monster's midsection. With a twist of its body the Serpent bursts free, turning back to chase Katara the opposite direction. Cut to Sokka rushing on shore behind the others, then turning to see that Toph is still stranded atop of the
rock pillar.)

Sokka: (calling out) Toph, come on. It's just ice.
Toph: (puts a foot out onto ice, shrinks back) Actually, I'm gonna stay on my little island where I can see. (A huge coil of the Sea Serpent crashes down behind her, sending her out onto the ice with a cry of fright.) Ok, I'm coming! (begins inching sideways across the ice span)
Sokka: (shouting encouragement) You're doing great! Just follow the sound of my voice!
Toph: (acidly) It's hard to ignore.
Sokka: You're almost there. (the serpents tail crashes through the bridge, shattering its entire length and sending Toph plunging into the lake)
Toph: (screams and thrashes helplessly) Help! I can't swim!
Sokka: I'm coming Toph!

(As Sokka struggles to remove a boot, Suki dives into the water towards Toph. Standing amazed, Sokka watches her swim furiously to the rescue as Toph slips beneath the waves. Reaching the place where she disappeared, Suki dives down and brings her gasping to the surface.)

Toph: (dramatically) Oh Sokka, you saved me. (plants a big kiss on Suki's cheek)
Suki: Actually, it's me.
Toph: (fatally embarrassed) Oh...well...heheh. (limply) You can go ahead and let me drown now.

(Cut to a shot of the Serpent's head thrashing in the distance. Cutting closer, Aang and Katara are shown circling the Serpent at tremendous speed, stirring up a irresistible whirlpool that holds it helpless. The spinning monster's neck cracks like a whip against the cliff-side, and it slinks off into the depths. Walking up a rise, the others cheer as Aang flies by with Katara.

Cut to a view of the far shore, then another showing the weary travelers descending down the last rise of the pass.)

Sokka: (pointing excitedly) There's the wall! (view pans past rocky barrens toward a vast wall that fills the distant horizon) Now it's nothing but smooth sailing to Ba Sing Se.
Ying: (gasps) Oh no! (doubles over, clutching her belly)
Sokka: (apprehensively) What's wrong?
Ying: The baby's coming! (the refugee family ease Ying to the ground
Sokka: (in rising panic) What! Now! Can't you hold it in or something?
Katara: Sokka, Calm down. I helped Gran-Gran deliver lots of babies back home.
Sokka: (completely panicking) This isn't the same as delivering an arctic seal! This is a real... human.... thing!
Katara: It's called a baby, and I helped todeliver plenty of those too. (speaking with authority) Aang, get some rags. Sokka, water. Toph, I need you to make an earth tent. A big one. (Toph creates a tent of stone slabs around the refugees) Suki, come with me. (both enter the tent)

(Cut to the ferry, making progress through the early morning mist. Zuko stands at the prow looking toward the nearing shoreline. Jet approaches him from behind.)

Jet: You know, as soon as I saw your scar, I knew exactly who you were. (Zuko glances warily at Jet who now stands next to him) You're an outcast, like me. And us outcasts have to stick together. We have to watch each other's backs, because no one else will.
Zuko: (grimly) I've realized lately, that being on your own isn't always the best path.

(The rocky cliffs of the opposite shore come into full view, and behind them a looming wall.

Cut to the darkened interior of the stone tent, where Than and the girl hold each of Ying's hands. Ying herself is laboring heavily, gasping for breath and sweating profusely. Katara is seated between her blanket-covered legs, back to the tent's entrance.)

Katara: You're doing great Ying. (calling back) Sokka! Where's that water? Get ready to push. (Sokka enters behind her) One, two, three...PUSH!

(As Ying cries out in effort, Sokka, watching over his sister's back, slumps unconscious to the ground.

Cut to the tent's exterior. Momo is perched overhead on a tree branch, while Aang, Toph and Sokka wait outside the tent entrance. Aang is huddled despondently to one side. Toph leans on the other side of the entrance. Sokka sits next to her, mopping his face with a cloth.)

Katara: (from inside) It's a girl!
Toph: (leaning over to Sokka) So, you want to go see the baby? Or are you going to faint like an old lady again?
Sokka: No no, I'm good this time. (Sokka stands and follows Toph into the tent. Moments later Katara appears at the entrance.)
Katara: Aang, you have to come see this. (steps back inside)

(Aang rises and walks morosely to the tent entrance, raises his head and looks inside. Everyone is gathered around Ying, who sits propped up on a bedroll. All attention is on the small bundle cradled in her arms.)

Toph: She sounds healthy.
Katara: (awed) She's beautiful.
Sokka: (dubiously) It's so...squishy looking.

(Camera draws close to the sleeping newborn, then back to Aang, as his expression melts into a bittersweet smile. Than is kneeling next to his wife, as both serenely watch their sleeping daughter.)

Than: What should we name her?
Ying: (turning to Than) I want our daughter's name to be unique. (looks down at her) I want it to mean something.

(Aang is still smiling as tears well up in his eyes, streaming down his cheeks before he wipes them away with his arm. He finally enters into the center of the tent.)

Aang: (softly) I've been going through a really hard time lately. But you've made me... hopeful again.
Ying: I know what I want to name our baby now. Hope.
Than: That's a perfect name. Hope.

(Cut to the outside, where Aang and Katara stand beneath a tree, away from the others.)

Aang: (thoughtfully) I thought I was trying to be strong, but really I was just running away from my feelings. Seeing this family together, so full of happiness and love, it reminded me of how I feel about Appa.....and how I feel about you.

(Katara wipes a streaming tear from her eye as Aang finishes speaking. Both step forward and embrace lovingly, tears welling up in Katara's closed eyes. They disengage as Suki, Sokka and Toph step toward them. Katara straightens Aang's collar before backing away.)

Aang: I promise I'll find Appa as fast as I can. I just really need to do this. (Tophhands him his staff)
Sokka: See ya in the big city.
Toph: Say hi to that big fuzzball for me. (slugs Aang's arm, who winces and rubs it painfully)
Katara: (gently) You'll find him Aang.
Aang: (softly) I know. Thank you Katara.

(As Aang snaps open his glider and prepares for takeoff, Momo stands next to him and spreads his wings in imitation. Toph, Sokka, Katara and Suki all stand back a few paces.)

Aang: (glancing over) You ready Momo?

(Momo chitters his assent. They both crouch, then hurtle into the sky as everyone waves farewell.

We see a shot of Aang and Momo soaring over the barrens toward the far-off walls of Ba Sing Se.

Cut to Sokka kneeling over his pack, as Suki walks up to him.)

Suki: Sokka, It's been really great to see you again.
Sokka: (standing) Whoa, hold on. Why does it sound like you're saying goodbye?
Suki: I came along because I wanted to make sure you got through the Serpent's Pass safely. But now I need to get back to the other Kyoshi warriors. (gestures back)
Sokka: (stunned) So you came along to protect me?
Suki: (blushing) Listen, I'm really sorry about last night. (looks askance) We were talking, and saying things, (closes eyes) I just got carried away and before I knew it I... (Sokka surprises her with a tender kiss, draws back)
Sokka: (gazing into her eyes) You talk too much.

(Both begin kissing passionately. Suki slips her arms around Sokka's neck. The camera pans upward past the rocky cliffs and into blue sky.

Fade into a shot of Aang and Momo swooping over an open desert towards the outer wall, nearly disappearing into the distance. Cut to a shot of them soaring up the vertical face of the wall, giving an impression of the walls awesome height as they pass through low clouds. Finally reaching the wall's summit, they perform a backwards loop and glide in for a landing. Aang, with Momo riding on his shoulder, looks serenely out over the wall. Turning to look back, the Avatar's expression changes to shock and dismay.

Cut to a ground level shot of the wall's base. As the camera pans away and out to the open desert, we see a formation of approaching vehicles kicking up a huge dust cloud. Various shots show us two groups of Fire nation tanks, dwarfed by the monolithic drilling machine they flank.)

Aang: (looks sadly to his lemur friend) Sorry Momo, Appa's gonna have to wait.

(Final shot of the towering wall over the back of the approaching drilling machine, fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Opening shot of a group of Fire Nation tanks rumbling across the barrens, escorting a gigantic vehicle. When the shot pulls back it is seen to be a titanic tunneling machine, 10 stories high and stretching back a great distance. The tanks flanking it appear as little more than insignificant toys by comparison. In another shot we are shown large segments of the drill's body pushing forward under steam power, punching steam driven spikes into the ground, then contracting again to gain forward movement. The camera pans fully back to show the entire length of the great Drill, a vast black iron cylinder creeping forward like a caterpillar, the tanks beside it ant-like. The shot switches to a top view, as a tower topped by a command center levers upward from the drill's back. Cut to the inside of the c.c., where Azula is shown seated on a throne, flanked by Mai and Ty Lee.)

War Minister Qin: (stepping into scene to address Azula) This drill is a feat of scientific ingenuity and raw destructive power. Once it tunnels through the wall, our troops will storm their city. The Earth kingdom will finally fall, and you can claim Ba Sing Se in the name of your father. Nothing can stop us.
Ty Lee: (looking away from a periscope) Hmm. What about those muscle-y guys down there?

(She looks back into periscope, then cut to a view through the periscope, where Earth kingdom benders are seen dropping into trenches. Switches to exterior view, showing a series of large trenches dug in the shadow of the wall, with the Fire nation forces approaching in the distance.)

War Minister Qin: (walks up and sharply raps the periscope, startling Ty Lee) Please, the drill's metal shell is impervious to any earthbending attack.
Azula: (condescendingly) Oh, I'm sure it is War Minister Qin. But just to be on the safe side... (in commanding tone) Mai, and Ty Lee, take the earthbenders out!
Mai: (twiddling knives) Finally, something to do.

(Cut to a scene of Katara, Sokka and Toph escorting Than and family out of a rocky pass toward the base of the great wall. As they pause, Aang and Momo swoop into view from the direction of the wall. Aang lands before them, Momo perching on his shoulder.)

Katara: Aang, what are you doing here? I thought you were looking for Appa?
Aang: I was, but something stopped me. Something big.

(Cut to wall's base, where Aang and Toph are jointly bending a rock platform up the face of the wall, lifting them all upwards. Camera pans back to show their rapid ascent up the wall.)

Sokka: (as platform ascends) Now what's so big that Appa has to wait?
Aang: That.

(The camera pans way back to show both the wall and the approaching Drill, then to an aerial view showing the massive machine flanked by eight tanks on either side.

Cut to Aang and the rest peering out over the top of the outer wall, down toward the Fire Nation forces.)

Ying: (despairingly) We made it to Ba Sing Se, and we're still not safe. No one is. (Than and family huddle together.)
Earthbender Guard: (from behind) What are you people doing here? Civilians aren't allowed on the wall.
Aang: (looking determined) I'm the Avatar. Take me to whoever's in charge.

(Cut to an area atop the outer wall where a roof is supported by tall arches. An Earth kingdom general waits seated at a desk.)

General Sung: (smiling) It is an honor to welcome you to the outer wall young Avatar, but your help is not needed.
Aang: Not needed?
General Sung: (smugly) Not needed. I have the situation under control. I assure you the Fire Nation cannot penetrate this wall. Many have tried to break through it, but none have succeeded.

(The general rises as he speaks, leading the group back out towards an open area of the wall manned by soldiers standing near large stacks of boulders. We are shown an aerial view of the outer wall. Nothing lies beyond the outer face but barren wastes, while a patchwork of fertile fields grow behind it.

Cut to scene of the general gazing contentedly out over the inward face of the wall, the heroes standing behind him.)

Toph: What about the Dragon of the West? He got in.
General Sung: (startled) Well...uh...technically yes. But he was quickly expunged. (more confidently) Nevertheless, that is why the city is named Ba Sing Se. It's the impenetrable city. They don't call it Na Sing Se. (belly laughs, then becomes serious) That means penetrable city.
Toph: Yeah, thanks for the tour, but we still got the drill problem.
General Sung: (pacing back to look out over wastes) Not for long. To stop it, I've sent an elite platoon of earthbenders called the Terra Team.
Sokka: (thoughtfully) That's a good group name, very catchy.

(Cut to a scene of the Terra Team launching their assault on the Fire nation forces. They propel one of the tanks into the air, then ride a surge of earth through the gap left in the tank's formation.)

Terra Team Leader: Ready... Attack!

(The earthbenders try to wedge several large pillars of stone against the side of the Drill, but it shatters them effortlessly. The Terra Team barely manages to raise a defensive shield against a barrage of Mai's throwing knives. Mai and Ty Lee are shown rappelling down the side of the Drill toward them. Nimbly avoiding their earthbending attacks, Ty Lee leaps in amongst them and begins delivering a flurry of pressure-point attacks. One by one the Terra Team drop helplessly at her feet.)

General Sung: (observing from a telescope) We're doomed! (flails arms in a panic)
Sokka: (slaps general hard on the face) Get a hold of yourself man!
General Sung: (rubbing cheek) You're right, I'm sorry.
Toph: Maybe you'd like the Avatar's help now?
General Sung: (meekly approaching Aang in a timid voice) Yes, please.

(Cut to Aang and friends looking out over the wall at the approaching Drill)

Aang: The question is, how are we gonna stop that thing?
Sokka: Why are you all looking at me?
Aang: You're the idea guy.
Sokka: (complaining) So I'm the only one who can ever come up with a plan? That's a lot of pressure.
Katara: And also the complaining guy.
Sokka: That part I don't mind.

(Cut to the Ferry Landing, then inside to the ticket gate. An Earth Kingdom official, a sour, heavy set woman with a large hairy mole above her eyebrow, looks over Iroh and Zuko's papers dubiously.)

Customs Lady: (sounding unpleasant) So, Mr. Lee, and Mr.... umm Mushy is it?
Iroh: It's pronounced Moo-shee.
Customs Lady: (looking up from papers angrily) You telling me how to do my job?
Iroh: (stepping closer) Uh, no no no. (speaking charmingly) But may I just say that you're like a flower in bloom, your beauty intoxicating.
Customs Lady: (smiling and obviously charmed) You're pretty easy on the eyes yourself handsome. (makes cat-claw gesture) Raorrr. Welcome to Ba Sing se. (stamps their papers and pushes them forward.)
Zuko: (snatching his papers from Iroh disgustedly) I'm gonna forget I saw that.

(Camera looks over Jet's shoulder as he observes Zuko and Iroh stepping past ticket gate.)

Jet: I think Lee would make a good Freedom Fighter. He's just trying to find his way in the world, like us. (View changes to Jet, Smellerbee and Longshot standing side by side in ticket line.)
Smellerbee:You don't know anything about him Jet.
Jet: (holding signature grass stalk to mouth) I know he didn't get that scar from a waterbender.
Smellerbee: Besides, I thought we were going straight now?
Jet: (shrugging) We are, and the new Freedom Fighters could use a guy like Lee. What do you think Longshot?
Longshot: (shoots a meaningful look) ...
Jet: I can respect that.

(Cut to an enclosed Infirmary atop the outer wall, where the members of the Terra Team lie on futons. General Sung, Aang , Sokka, Toph and Momo watch as Katara spreads the blue energies of her healing technique over the arm of one of the fallen warriors.)

General Sung: What's wrong with him? He doesn't look injured.
Katara: His Chi is blocked. (dissipates the energies) Who did this to you?
Terra Team Soldier: (moaning) Two girls ambushed us, one of them hit me with a bunch of quick jabs, and suddenly I couldn't earthbend, and I could barely move...and then she cart wheeled away. (recognition dawns in Katara's eyes)
Katara: (lookingaway thoughtfully) Ty Lee. She doesn't look dangerous, but she knows the human body and it's weak points. It's like she takes you down from the inside.
Sokka: (an idea suddenly hits him and he begins gesturingwildly Ooo, ooo, ooo, ooo, ooo!
Katara: Yes?
Sokka: (excitedly) What you just said, that's how we're gonna take down the Drill. The same way Ty Lee took down all these big earthbenders.
Toph: (enthusiastically) By hitting its pressure points!
Aang: (looking out a window at the Drill below) We'll take it down from the inside.



Act II

(Scene opens with a front view of the spinning face of the drill, flanked by Fire nation tanks. Panning down, we see that ahead in its path Toph, Aang, Momo, Katara and Sokka are crouched down in one of the Terra Team's abandoned trenches.)

Toph: (gesturing back towards the Drill) Once I whip up some cover, you're not gonna be able to see, so stay close to me.

(Leaping from the trench, Toph begins a strenuous earthbending gesture that ends with a powerful foot stomp, sending a mighty blast of dust and broken stone rocketing along the ground toward the drill.)

Toph: Run!

(Racing closely behind Toph, the team plunges into the swirling white dust cloud. The scene cuts to the Drill Command Center, where Ty Lee is again looking out through the periscope.)

Ty Lee: (peering more closely) Hey, look at that dust cloud. (periscope view shows front of drill and billowing cloud) It's so...poofy. (looks back to the others with a spaced-out expression) Poof!
War Minister Qin: Don't worry Princess. I'm sure it's nothing. (Azula looks to Ching doubtfully)

(Cut to Toph and the rest running through the thick dust to emerge near the front of the drill. Standing in the drill's shadow, she bends open a pit in the ground.)

Toph: Everyone into the hole!

(Toph hops down into the hole after the others, and the surface immediately swirls shut above them. The camera pans down below ground and into utter blackness)

Sokka: It's so dark down here, I can't see a thing.
Toph: (feigning horror) Oh no, what a nightmare.
Sokka: Sorry.

(Cut to the surface, underneath the drill, where the ground bulges upwards and opens up. Toph emerges, followed by the others. They stand underneath the Drill itself, a vast, gloomy region framed by long rows of tracked wheels, with the Drill's body as its ceiling.)

Sokka: (pointing ahead and upwards) There!

(An opening in the Drill's belly is seen, with a narrow length of pipe extending out of it horizontally. Aang leaps up to catch it and hangs upside down from it by his legs. He catches Katara and then Sokka by the hands, boosting them up into the Drill. There is a pause and we realize that Toph is not following.)

Sokka: (peeking out upside down from the opening) Toph, Come on!
Toph: (looking resigned) No way am I going in that metal monster. I can't bend in there. I'll try to slow it down out here.
Sokka: Okay, good luck. (both he and Aang disappear up into the Drill)

(Outside, Toph tries unsuccessfully to stop the forward movement of the Drill by bending up an outcropping of stone, but both Toph and the brace are pushed along by the unstoppable force of the Drill's progress.

Cut to the Drill's inner corridors, where Sokka leads the others through a red-lit area of pipes and valves.

Sokka: (studying the pipes) I need a plan of this machine. Some schematics that show what the inside looks like. Then we can find it's weak points.
Aang: Where are we gonna get something like that (Sokka abruptly draws his machete and chops off asteam valve) What are you doing! Someone's gonna hear us!

(Aang looks about worriedly as the room begins to fill with steam.)

Sokka: (confidently) That's the point. I figure a machine this big needs engineers to run it, and when something breaks...
Katara: They come to fix it.

(Aang and Katara exchange pleased smiles. Moments later, a large Fire Nation engineer in a filter mask appears through the steam holding a large wrench and a rolled up document.)

Katara: (appearing behind him) Hi.

(Katara bends the steam, condensing it into an icy shell that entraps the engineer.)

Sokka: (runs up and takes plans) This'll work, thanks!

(He runs off, leaving the engineer standing helplessly, eventually dropping the wrench in his other hand.

Cut to Sokka leading the others up metal stairs, stopping to unroll the plans across a large pipe.)

Sokka: (studying cross-diagram of Drill) It looks like the Drill is made up of two main structures. There's the inner mechanism, where we are now, and the outer shell. (traces his finger along diagram while speaking) The inner part and the outer part are connected by these braces. If we cut through them, the entire thing will collapse.

(Both Aang and Katara nod in agreement and they all race off-screen.

Cut to debarkation point for Ba Sing Se, which resembles a large stone train station. People are milling about in groups, and the scene shifts to Zuko and Iroh, who are seated with arms crossed at a waiting area. Jet casually sits down next to Zuko.

Jet: So, you guys got plans once you're inside the city?
Tea Peddler: Get your hot tea here! Finest tea in Ba Sing Se!

(All three look up to see a tea merchant pushing a concession cart in front of them.)

Iroh: (waving an arm) Oh! Jasmine, please. (the peddler pours tea into Iroh's bowl, who delightedly takes a sip. His eyes widen in shock and he spits it out in disgust) Blaugh! Ugh. Coldest tea in Ba Sing Se is more like it. What a disgrace!
Jet: Hey, can I talk to you for a second?

(Jet gestures for Zuko, who seems to be ignoring the tea episode, to follow him. Zuko rises reluctantly and sighs.)

Jet: (walking away from where Iroh sits) You and I have a much better chance of making it in the city if we stick together. You want to join the Freedom Fighters?
Zuko: Thanks, but I don't think you want me in your gang.
Jet: Come on, we made a great team looting that Captain's food. Think of all the good we could do for these refugees.
Zuko: (turning and walking back towards Iroh) I said no.
Jet: (mildly surprised) Have it your way.

(Jet focuses in on the seated Iroh, who is carefully enjoying the tea now steaming vigorously in his cup. Jet suddenly bristles and his eyes open wide in shock, realizing what he is seeing. Reaching Iroh, Zuko looks back toward Jet, who now wears a look of hostile suspicion on his face. Jet turns and walks off.

Watching Jet leave, Zuko abruptly turns and dashes the cup of tea from his uncle's hand.)

Iroh: (surprised) Hey!
Zuko: (whispering through gritted teeth) What are you doing firebending your tea?! For a wise old man, that was a pretty stupid move.
Iroh: (mournfully) I know you're not supposed to cry over spilled tea, but... (Iroh sniffles and the cup is shown overturned in a puddle) that's so sad.

(Cut to another aerial view of the approaching Drill and its tank escort. Scene changes to the interior of Drill, with Sokka leading the others out a doorway and onto a massive steel beam.)

Sokka: (studying plans) Wow, it looks a lot thicker in person than it does in the plans. We're going to have to work pretty hard to cut through that.
Katara: (crossing arms) What's this we stuff? Aang and I are going to have to do all the work.
Sokka: (turns and gestures to self) Look, I'm the plan guy, You two (makes rapid chop-chop gestures) are the "cut stuff up with waterbending" guys. (strikes a heroic pose) Together, we're Team Avatar!

(Aang and Katara exchange mortified looks. Katara is then shown bending the water out of her flask, sending it to ring against the edge of a vertical beam before being caught by Aang, who bends it back towards her along the same path. As the water zings back in forth, a cut begins to form in the side of the thick beam. Wearing looks of strenuous concentration, Aang and Katara again and again send the water scything back through the diagonal cut. Moving forward to a point where the cut has reached the midway point through the beam, Katara and Aang are shown bent over and gasping with exhaustion.)

Sokka: (pumping arms in the air) C'mon team, don't quit now, we're...
Katara: (explodes with frustration) Grrrrrr! (shoots a menacing glare back at Sokka, who stands wide-eyed, arms still in air)
Sokka: I mean, (recovers and points reassuringly) you're almost there.

(The two of them resume slicing away at the girder little by little. Sokka watches on, an eager look of anticipation growing on his face. Finally the beam is cut completely in two, and the upper section grinds down the angled cut a few inches before screeching to a halt.)

Katara: (clearlyexhausted) At this rate, we won't do enough damage before the drill reaches the wall.
Aang: (sitting down to rest) I don't know how many more of those I have in me.

(An ominous shudder and low moan passes down the length of the Drill.)

Sokka: Do you hear that We took it down. We better get out of here fast!

(As they race away, they pause at a doorway as a voice comes down from overhead speaking tubes.)

War Minister Qin: Congratulations crew, the Dill has made contact with the wall of Ba Sing Se.

(Cut to view of Qin in the command center) Start the countdown to victory!

Azula is shown with an unreadable expression on her face, Followed by the Drill's titanic bit penetrating into the surface of the outer wall.)



Act III

(The scene opens with a high aerial view of the Drill as it starts to bore into the outer wall. A different view shows the rubble from the wall being saturated with moisture as it is conveyed backwards through the Drill. The camera follows the slurry back through a thick pipe to where Sokka is shown struggling futilely against the severed girder.)

Sokka: (grimacing) C'mon brace, budge!

(Camera pans back to show everyone else resting on the large horizontal beam, while Sokka makes several efforts to push the severed one.)

Katara: This is bad, really bad.
Sokka: Were putting everything we've got into busting these braces, but it's taking too long!
Aang: (suddenly inspired) Maybe we don't need to cut all the way through. Toph has been teaching me that you shouldn't give 100% of your energy into any one strike. (levitates to hisfeet) Sokka, take a fighting stance.You've gotta be quick and accurate. (hooks a foot around one of Sokka's ankles, pulling him off balance) Hit a series of points, and break your opponent's stance.(hits Sokka with a series of pretend blows) And when he's reeling back, you deliver the final blow. (bonks him lightly on the head) His own weight becomes his downfall. Literally. (A he finishes speaking, Sokka collapses >forward comically.)
Katara: So we just need to weaken the braces, instead of cut all the way through.
Aang: (pointing upward) Then I'll go to the top of this thing, and deliver the final blow.
Sokka: (raising arms) And boom, it all comes crashing down! (sweeps arms down)
Aang: (passionately) Everyone inside that wall, the whole world, is counting on us.
Sokka: The whole world, minus the Fire Nation that is.

(Sokka grins, while others look on exasperated.

Cut to the underside of the Drill, where Toph still struggles mightily to slow its advance with a stone brace, which merely results in a pile of loose earth growing behind her feet as both she and the brace are drug along.)

Toph: (straining) C'mon twinkle toes, hurry up!

(Back inside the Drill's superstructure, we are shown scenes of Katara and Aang inflicting cuts into various support beams.)

Aang: That's enough, we need to get to the next one!

(Cut to the outside, as earthbender's push wave after wave of boulders from the top of the outer wall. They ring harmlessly off of its hull and drop to the side. Cut to the Drill command center, where Azula , War Minister Qin and the rest of the crew listen to messages coming from the various speaking tubes.)

Speaking Tube 1: (alarmed) War Minister, an engineer was ambushed! His schematics were stolen! (The War Minister looks shocked, while Azulas eyes narrow in suspicion.)
Speaking Tube 2: (alarmed) War Minister, a brace on the starboard side has been cut clean through! It's sabotage sir! (The War Minister is frozen in terror, watching Azula from the corners of his eyes.)
Azula: (turning from Qin to Mai and Ty Lee) Let's go ladies.

(Cut to the Drill's superstructure, where Aang and Katara continue their sabotage.)

Sokka: (Encouragingly) Good work Team Avatar. Now Aang just needs to... (glances up) DUCK!

(He ducks and covers just in time to avoid a blast of blue flame. Azula, Mai and Ty Lee run out onto another massive girder well above Aang and friends.)

Aang: (narrowly avoiding a second blast) Whoa!
Ty Lee: Wow Azula, you were right, it is the Avatar! (smiles seductively) ... and friends.
Sokka: (smiles vacantly and waves) Hey.

(Katara marches past and yanks him off camera. As her allies rush off camera to pursue, Ty Lee drops to the bottom edge of the girder and swings out towards Aang, who throws her backwards with a gust of wind. Aang and his friends are shown fleeing down corridors, when Aang comes to a halt at a T intersection.)

Aang: Guys get out of here, I know what I need to do. (heads other direction with Momo)
Katara: Wait! You need this water more than I do!

(As Aang turns, she draws out her flask of bending water and throws it to him. Sokka and Katara rush down a corridor, while Aang and Momo head the opposite direction.)

Azula: (reaching intersection) Follow them, the Avatar is mine. (Azula races off after Aang, while Mai and Tai Lee pursue the others)

(Cut to Katara and Sokka reaching a dead end, with a large hatch marked by a sign written in Chinese.)

Katara: (as Sokka struggles with hatch) Slurry pipeline What does that mean?
Sokka: (finally opening hatch, peering into it with Katara) It's rock and water mixed together, it means our way out.

(As Katara begins to lower herself into the slurry pipe, Mai and Ty Lee suddenly arrive on the scene. Katara lets go and plunges in followed by Sokka, just as Mai's throwing knives ricochet off the open slurry hatch. Both splash into the slurry neck-deep and are quickly swept away by the current. Cut back to Mai looking down into the slurry flow.)

Mai: (completely revolted) Ughh, disgusting!
Ty Lee: (peering down) Come on, you heard Azula.We have to follow them.
Mai: She can shoot all the lightning she wants at me, I am not going in that wall sludge juice.

(Mai shudders. Ty Lee hops down into the slurry flow, sending up a great spash that narrowly misses Mai. With a final expression of disgust Mai slams closed the slurry hatch.

Cut to scene of Aang racing through the Drill's engineering section with airbending speed, past engineers who barely detect him through their respirator masks. Aang finally races up a long ladder toward the Drill's surface.

Cut to an overview of the Drill showing a large pool of slurry starting to form at its rear. Screaming with fear, Sokka and Katara ride the cascade of slurry out the rear spout of the Drill, sliding to a halt in the grayish ooze.

Sokka tries to wipe the revolting stuff off of his tongue, pounds his fists into the slurry in disgust. Ty Lee emerges from pipe exhaust, riding waist deep in the slurry flow with a look of wicked anticipation on her face. Just as she is about to reach the ground, Katara bends back the rush of slurry, pinning Ty Lee at the terminus of the pipe.)

Katara: (fiercely) Why don't you try blocking my chi now circus freak! (stands resolutely with one hand upraised)
Sokka: Katara, keep that up. The pressure will build up in the drill, then when Aang delivers the final blow, it will be ready to pop!

(Cut to Aang and Momo emerging from an opening onto the Drill's upper hull. The pair start racing towards the front of the Drill, which has already penetrated deep into the wall.)

Aang: (pausing) This looks like a good spot Momo. (glances up, and barely avoids the large boulder that bounces off where he was standing) Aggh!

(dodges a second and third boulder as they continue to rain down from above)

Aang: (shouting upward) General Sung, tell your soldiers to stop shooting rocks down here!
General Sung: (looking down from a great height, he apparently doesn't hear) Soldiers, whatever you do, don't stop shooting rocks down there!

(Sung draws his hands up to his face in distress, while the row of benders next to him release another volley of boulders.

Below, Aang vaults past this new wave of stones, and as he lands, begins rapidly scything the surface of the drill with the water Katara gave to him. The camera pans the entire length of the Drill. At its rear, Katara continues to block the pipe's exhaust with a slurry ball containing Ty Lee.)

Sokka: (in lecturing tone) Good technique little sister! Keep it up! Don't forget to breathe!
Katara: (losing temper) You know, I am just about sick and tired of you telling me what to do all day. You're like a chattering Hog-Monkey!
Sokka: (screaming) Just bend the slurry woman!!

(Katara bends up a rush of slurry with her free hand, launching him up to plunge back down into the foul muck.)

Toph: (emerging from beneath the Drill) You guys need some help?
Katara: Toph, help me plug up this drain!

(Bracing her muddy legs she coordinates with Katara, driving the slurry-plug even further up the pipe. Switching to an internal view of the Drill, we see the slurry pipe system begin to buckle and swell under the pressure.

Cut back to the front of the Drill, where fountains of slurry begin to jet where the Drill meets the wall. Nearby Aang continues to rapidly cut away at the outer hull in an X pattern.)

Aang: (winded) What I'd give to be a metal bender.

(Momo, perched on Aang's shoulder, turns and give out a warning cry, allowing Aang to turn and deflect a deadly blast of blue fire. Momo narrowly avoids the flame.)

Aang: Momo, get out of here!

(Momo flies off as Aang assumes a stance.

The camera follows Azula's shadow to Azula herself, as she readies a stance with a look of steady confidence, then back to Aang who looks nowhere near as sure of himself. It pulls back to show the two benders facing off about a dozen yards apart atop the Drill. Azula begins by launching a ball of fire at Aang, who ducks and simultaneously sends an arc of wind towards her. Leaping over the windblast, Azula once again attacks, but is forced to counter a rapid series of water-whips that keep slapping away her attack gestures. Leaping into the air, Azula delivers a pair of flying firebending kicks that completely vaporize the water Aang was bending sending him spinning back. She is prevented from pressing the attack however, as another barrage of boulders from above force both of them to dodge. Aang catches one of the boulders with bending, sending it hurtling at Azula who falls into a split to avoid it, rises, and launches another fire blast. Aang earthbends pieces of debris into a protective wall, then punches chunks of it toward Azula. Kicking them out of the air, she launches a sweeping counter blast which barely misses Aang's head, who responds by punching an even larger chunk towards her. Vaulting into the air, Azula executes an incredible forward spinning double-kick fire blast, obliterating his defensive wall and hurtling him backwards to slam against the outer wall.

Readying another attack, Azula pauses as she sees the Avatar drop to his knees and slump forward unconscious. Aang is seen from above sprawled against the Drill's hull. Azula is jarred by the forward advance of the drill, and the massive bit is shown bursting through the other side of the outer wall. Cuts to an overview showing the great Drill piercing completely through the wall, then back to a shot of Aang being slowly pulled underneath the walls exterior by the forward progress of the Drill. Azula grabs him by the back of his collar and presses him upright against the wall. Aang slowly begins to rouse, and the camera switches to Aang's point of view as we see a blurry Azula preparing to deliver the final blow. Closeup of Aang's eye snapping open in alarm, then his right hand cracking open the surface of the wall and surrounding itself with a mitt of broken rock. He catches Azula's fire punch in the rock mitt and shoves her far back with it, her steel shod boots sparking against the Drill's hull. Aang strikes a defiant earthbending stance as Azula charges towards him, both hands ablaze.

The battle is suddenly interrupted by a blast of slurry that erupts at the point where the Drill meets the wall, throwing Aang from his feet before surging out to crash against the onrushing Azula. Aang flails about trying to regain his feet, and just manages to make it to his knees before Azula, arms windmilling, skates helplessly through the slop to send them both careening into the wall. Knocked momentarily senseless, they both slide face-first through the slurry and away from the wall, diverging to slip down opposite sides of the Drill. Recovering, Azula tries to stop her descent using her hands and feet, her steel-toed boots sparking. She manages to stop herself midway down the side of the Drill, clutching at it precariously. Aang meanwhile slides down his back, his rock mitt breaking apart as he tries to stop himself with it. He is rescued by Momo, swooping down, catching the back of his collar and pulling him upright so that he can use his swift-running technique to regain the top of the Drill. Aang leaps back onto the back of the Drill, and Momo settles on his shoulder.)

Aang: (scratchingMomo's head) Thanks Momo, I owe you one.

(Aang walks along the Drill's back, through the slurry mess, to stop at the X cut into the plating.)

Aang: Now all I need is a... (boulder crashes down startling him) Actually, that is what I needed for once.

(Bending the boulder around to the incision, he begins a series of sweeping earthbending moves, each one slicing away a large chunk of the boulder. Eventually he is left with a large stone spike pointed down into the breach. Aang drops back, falls into a sprinter's stance and starts running toward the wall. Nearing it he bends up a ball of air and leaps atop it, riding up the sheer face of the outer wall. As he rockets up the wall the ball dissipates, and Aang begins to run up the vertical face. As his momentum falls away, he turns and we see that Aang has nearly reached the top of the outer wall, the Drill far below him.

With a powerful shout Aang completes his turn and wind-sprints downward at a fantastic speed. Meanwhile, Azula having finally crawled back up to the top of the Drill, spots Aang streaking down face of the wall. With a shout, Aang leaps free of the wall and plunges downward, as we cut to Azula preparing a potent blast to intercept him. Her attack passes just over Aang's head as he strikes the spike with incredible force. The explosive shockwave hurls a screaming Azula through the air as it travels the length of the Drill. Cut to the superstructure of the Drill, where we see weakened beams begin to shear in half as torrents of slurry rush past. Cut to an exterior view of the entire Drill, as a chain of slurry eruptions begin at the front segment and work their way towards the rear. Cut to Toph and Katara, still in bending stances, with Sokka standing behind them.)

Toph: Here it comes! (begins raising the three of them up on a pillar of rock)

(As the rock pillar rises from the lake of slurry, a great rush of it issues from the exhaust spout. Ty Lee is washed up against the pillar, slammed against it and held there by the powerful current. Safe atop the pillar, Toph and the Water siblings watch as one by one the segments of the Drill slump to a stop, great clouds of steam rising from them. On the other side of the wall we see the massive bit slowly stop rotating. Cut to a high aerial view showing the remains of the steaming drill nearly submerged in slurry. Cut back to a mud-covered Aang standing atop of the stone spike, as the sun sets in the background.

Wiping the mud from his face, he reveals an enormous grin. Momo lands on his muddy shoulder and starts licking the slurry from his forehead. Cut to a view through the mud-covered windshield of the Drill command center. As the mud slides away it reveals War Minister Qin, standing with an expression of horror and amazement. In another shot we follow a long streak of mud that had exploded up the face of the wall. General Sung stands there completely covered in mud, as it drips away to reveal the pathetic expression on his face.

Cut to Ty Lee sitting up from the slurry pool, wiping clear her face, and spitting out a mouthful of mud in disgust. Azula slides down the back of the Drill, dropping down next to her and splashing her with a fresh layer of mud. Azula looks back to see a steaming hatch open in the rear of the drill, revealing a somber Mai.)

Mai: We lost.

(Cut to the Train Station where an ornate stone train has arrived to pick up passengers.)

Conductor: (voice over) Last call for Ba Sing se!

(Cut to Jet striding angrily toward the train, flanked by Smellerbee and Longshot.)

Smellerbee: Jet, relax! So the old guy had some hot tea. Big deal.
Jet: He heated it himself! (close-up of furious Jet) Those guys are firebenders.

(Cut to a scene of the train, showing Iron and Zuko boarding a car in the background, pulling back to show Jet, Smellerbee and Longshot watching them. Jet raises his collar and Longshot pulls down his hat as they attempt to look inconspicuous as they board a few cars down.

Cut to train car interior as Zuko and Iroh enter, where we see Than and family already seated. Zuko sits down with his arms crossed, still obviously angry. Iroh, sitting down between Zuko and Ying, glances at his nephew before leaning over and smiling at Ying. She is cradling a sleeping Hope in her lap while a grinning Than has his arm draped over her shoulders.)

Iroh: What a handsome baby. (tickles her blanket with his finger)
Ying: Thank you.

(The camera closes in on Hope's peacefully sleeping face while her mother beams over her.

Cut to a shot of the rear of the train, as two earthbenders begin to scoot it forward with a grinding noise. We follow the train out of the station. The scene cuts back to show the train traveling on a raised track over sunset lit fields.

Cut to a shot of Toph, Aang, Momo, Sokka and Katara watching the sun set over the barrens from atop the outer wall.)

Sokka: (enthusiastically) I just want to say, good effort out there today Team Avatar.
Katara: (slightly annoyed) Enough with the Team Avatar stuff. No matter how many times you say it, it's not gonna catch on.
Sokka: How about... (whips out boomerang, startling Momo) the "Boomerang Squad!", see it's good cause it's got "Aang" in it. (puts hand on Aang's head Boomer-Aang.
Aang: I kinda like that one.
Katara: Let's talk about this on our way into the city.

(She and the others start walking away.)

Sokka: The "Aang Gang"?
Katara: Sokka.
Sokka: The "Fearsome Foursome"?
Toph: You're crazy.
Sokka: (now alone) Why? We're fearsome!

(Sokka races after them. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence, including clips from "The Library", "The Serpent's Pass", and "The Drill".]



Act I

(Fade into a scene of fox antelopes grazing on a hill side. They look up at the monorail tracks above as a car slides past, pushed by two earthbenders. Cut to inside the car, where Aang, Katara, Sokka, Toph and Momo are awaiting their arrival at Ba Sing Se. Katara looks out the window and spots the inner wall of the capital drawing closer.)

Katara: Look, the inner wall. I can't believe we finally made it to Ba Sing Se in one piece.
Sokka: Hey don't jinx it! We could still be attacked by some giant, exploding Fire Nation spoon. Or find out the city's been submerged in an ocean full of killer shrimp.
Toph: You been hitting the cactus juice again?
Sokka: I'm just sayin', weird stuff happens to us.

(A very strange man with a glossy stare and a large yellow plant in his mouth takes a seat between Toph and Sokka, startling them. Weird music plays as he chews the plant.

Aang looks out the window then closes his eyes sadly.)

Katara: Don't worry Aang, we'll find Appa.
Aang: It's such a big city.
Sokka: He's a giant bison. Where could someone possibly hide him? Oh.

(The car passes through the inner wall and enters the vas, enormous city. Ba Sing Se stretches almost as far as the eye can see, and is riddled with many roads and buildings. Their car finally comes to a stop at the monorail station. All of them disembark and are greeted by another spectacular view of Ba Sing Se.)

Toph: (sighs) Back in the city. Great.
Sokka: What's the problem? It's amazing!
Toph: Just a bunch of walls and rules. You wait; you'll get sick of it in a couple of days.

(Aang looks at the bison whistle resting in his palm. He brings it to his lips and blows it as he looks across the city.)

Aang: I'm comin' for you buddy. He's here. I can feel it.

(Behind the group, the monorail cars depart. On the other side of the track is a woman with long dark hair that billows in the wind. She approaches them with an unnatural smile on her face.)

Joo Dee: Hello, my name is Joo Dee. I have been given the great honor of showing the Avatar around Ba Sing Se. And you must be Sokka, Katara, and Toph. Welcome to our wonderful city. Shall we get started ?
Sokka: Yes. We have information about the Fire Nation army that we need to deliver to the Earth King immediately.
Joo Dee: Great, let's begin our tour. And then I'll show you to your new home here. I think you'll like it.

(Joo Dee turns around and attempts to lead Aang and his friends.)

Sokka: Augh! Maybe you missed what I said. We need to talk to the King about the war, it's important.
Joo Dee: You're in Ba Sing Se now. Everyone is safe here.

(Everyone has a confused look on their face in reaction to Joo Dee's odd statement.

Fade to an overhead shot of the area of the city near the wall. An ostrich horse is pulling a carriage containing Joo Dee, Aang and his friends through the streets. Many shops and refugees line the streets. Cut to a shot inside of the carriage.)

Joo Dee: This is the lower ring.
Katara: What's that wall for?
Joo Dee: Oh, Ba Sing Se has many walls. There are the ones outside protecting us, and the one's inside that help maintain order. This is where our newest arrivals live, as well as our craftsman and artisans, people that work with their hands. It's so quaint and lively.

(Cut to a shot of two shady men conversing in an alley. One of them is holding a large sword that glistens in the light. Both glare at the carriage as it passes.)

Joo Dee: You do want to watch your step though.
Katara: Why do they have all these poor people blocked off in one part of the city?
Aang: This is why I never came here before. I always heard it was so different from the way the monks taught us to live.

(Shift scenes to another part of the lower ring. Cut to Zuko walking down the street. Iroh catches up to him from behind, holding a large vase with several orange flowers placed in it. Cut to a close up of Zuko staring coldly at the flora.)

Iroh: I just want our new place to look nice in case someone brings home a lady friend. (He gives Zuko a small nudge with his elbow.)
Zuko: This city is a prison. I don't want to make a life here.
Iroh: Life happens wherever you are, whether you make it or not. Now come on, I found us some new jobs, and we start this afternoon.

(Cut to a shot from behind Zuko and Iroh as they walk away from the camera. Someone's feet step out in front of the camera. Cut to a close up of Jet staring hard at the two firebenders.

Jet: Look at them, firebenders living right under everyone's nose. (Smellerbee and Longshot walk up to Jet from an alley.)
Smellerbee: Jet, you saw a man with a hot cup of tea. It doesn't prove he's a firebender. And what if he is, are we supposed to attack them I thought we were starting over here, changing our ways.
Jet: We are, when I get the evidence I need, I'll report them to the police and let them handle it. Ok?

(Shift scenes back to Joo Dee taking Aang and his friends on the tour of Ba Sing Se. Their carriage is crossing over a bridge. They are now in a much cleaner and nicer looking part of the city.)

Joo Dee: This is the middle ring of Ba Sing Se, home to the financial district, shops and restaurants and the university.
Sokka: Yeah, we met a Professor from Ba Sing Se University. He took us to an ancient underground library where we discovered information about the war that is absolutely crucial for the King to hear!

(Sokka says this all in one breath, and leans in close to Joo Dee to emphasize his point. Joo Dee simply grins cheerfully.)

Joo Dee: Isn't history fascinating? Look, here's one of the oldest buildings in the middle ring, Town Hall.

(The carriage stops and Joo Dee exits. Sokka stares after her, bewildered.)

Sokka: Is that woman deaf She only seems to hear every other word I say.
Toph: It's called "being handled". Get used to it.

(Toph crosses her arms and Aang and Katara look at Sokka hopelessly.

Change scenes to a small tea shop in the lower ring. Jet is leaning against the shop's wall near the window. He turns around and peeks inside, spotting Zuko and Iroh speaking with the tea shop owner.)

Tea shop owner: Well, you certainly look like official tea servers. How do you feel?
Zuko: Ridiculous.

(Zuko and Iroh are both wearing aprons. Iroh desperately attempts to tie the string behind his back, but his effort is in vain.)

Iroh: Uh, Does this possibly come in a larger size?
Tea shop owner: I have extra string in the back. Have some tea while you wait.

(The owner pours two cups of tea and hands them to his new employees before heading to the back of the shop. Iroh takes a sip from his cup, but quickly pulls it away, his face contorted in disgust.)

Iroh: Eeow! This tea is nothing more than hot leaf juice!
Zuko: Uncle, that's what all tea is.
Iroh: How can a member of my own family say something so horrible? We'll have to make some major changes around here.

(Iroh grabs the tea pot and heads over to the window Jet is spying through. Jet gasps and pulls away just in time and Iroh dumps the tea out the window. Jet slowly stalks around the corner of the shop and leaves.

Shift scenes to Aang and his party. Their tour has come to the Upper Ring, a beautiful area full of rolling hills. Tall pagodas are seen sitting atop of these hills.)

Joo Dee: The Upper Ring is home to our most important citizens. Your house is not too far from here.

(Fade to the carriage passing by another wall with a tall gate. Behind it the roof of an enormous building can be seen. Three men standing in the gateway, wearing dark robes and wide brimmed hats turn their eyes towards the group.)

Katara: What's inside that wall?
Sokka: And who are the mean looking guys in robes?
Joo Dee: Inside is the Royal Palace. Those men are agents of the Dai Li, the cultural authority of Ba Sing Se. They are the guardians of all our traditions.
Aang: Can we see the King now?
Joo Dee: Oh, no! One doesn't just pop in on the Earth King.

(Aang nods his head sadly. Fade to a shot of the sky. Momo flies in a circle before descending and landing on the roof of a small but very lovely house.)

Joo Dee: Here we are. Your new home. (A messenger runs up to Joo Dee and hands her a scroll.) More good news, your request for an audience with the Earth King is being processed, and should be put through in about a month. Much more quickly than usual.
Sokka: (stunned) A month!
Joo Dee: Six to eight weeks, actually.

(Joo Dee grins at them. Fade to commercial.)



Act II

(The episode returns with a brief shot of the new house before cutting to a panning right shot of the living room. There are lit lamps hanging from the ceiling. Katara and Toph are sitting on square mats in the middle of the room. Behind them are some steps leading to a slightly elevated portion of the room.)

Joo Dee: Isn't it nice? I think you will really enjoy it here.
Sokka: I think we'd enjoy it more if we weren't staying so long. Can't we see the King any sooner?
Joo Dee: The Earth King is very busy running the finest city in the world, but he will see you as soon as time permits.
Aang: If we are going to be here for a month, we should spend our time looking for Appa.

(Momo perks up at the mention of Appa.)

Joo Dee: (bowing) I'll be happy to escort you anywhere you would like to go.
Toph: We don't need a babysitter. (Toph stands up and begins heading for the door.)
Joo Dee: Oh, I won't get in the way. (takes a small step into Toph's path) And to leave you alone would make me a bad host. Where shall we start?

(Cut to a brief overhead shot of the outer ring before changing to a shot of a bowl of birdseed connected to a pole. Momo jumps on to the bowl and begins eating the birdseed but is quickly scared off by a cat owl as it screeches at him. Cut to a wider shot of the room. Aang and his party are in a pet store and are speaking with the owner at the counter.)

Pet store owner: I'm sorry, but I haven't heard anything about a flying bison. I didn't even know there were any.
Aang: If someone wanted to sell a stolen animal without anyone knowing, where would they go?
Sokka: (agitated)Where's the black market? Who runs it? Come on, you know! (points an accusing finger at the owner)
Pet shop owner: (nervous and perspiring) Uh... (looks at Joo Dee standing behind Aang and Sokka. She smiles at him and slowly shakes her head) That would be illegal. You'll have to leave now. Your lemur is harassing my sparrowkeets.

(Cut to a shot of Momo at another birdseed bowl surrounded by squawking sparrowkeets. He covers his head and quickly gobbles a several small handfuls of birdseed.

Fade to the courtyard of Ba Sing Se University. There are a few students walking around and a tall statue in the middle. Cut to a shot of Aang and his group speaking to a student sitting at the foot of the statue's pedestal.)

Student: Hmm, I've never seen any sandbenders or nomads around here. You should ask Professor Zei, he teaches the class on dessert cultures.
Sokka: Right. And which of your professors could we ask about the war with the Fire Nation?

(The student, unsure of what to do, glances at Joo Dee, still smiling and standing behind the rest of the group. She leans in and shakes her head at the student. Sokka catches this out of the corner of his eye and turns to look at Joo Dee, but she stops before he can tell what she is doing.)

Student: (nervous) Uh, I don't know. I'm not a political science student. I have to get to class. Ugh!

(The student hurries to get away, but trips and drops the scrolls he is carrying. He gasps and grumbles as he picks them back up and continues on. Joo Dee waves goodbye as he goes.

Fade to a shot of Aang and his friends standing at the steps of their house. Joo Dee is sitting inside the carriage and talking to them through window.)

Joo Dee: Well, I'm sorry no one has seen your bison. Why don't you go get some rest? Someone will be over with dinner later.

(Aang and his friends watch as the carriage drives off. They then notice a man in the house across from them peeking through a window at them.)

Sokka: (whispering) Hey, come with me.

(Everyone follows Sokka across the street. Cut to a shot of Sokka knocking on the front door. The same man appears and opens the door, smiling at them.)

Pao: You're the Avatar. I heard you were in town. I'm Pao.
Sokka: So Pao, what's goin' on with this city? Why is everyone here so scared to talk about the war?
Pao: (shifting his eyes left and right)War? scared What do you mean?
Toph: I can feel you shaking.
Pao: Look, I'm just a minor government official. I've waited 3 years to get this house. I don't want to get into trouble. (looks left and right to make sure no one is watching)
Katara: Get in trouble with who?
Pao: (putting a finger to his lips) Shh, listen, you can't mention the war here, and whatever you do, stay away from the Dai Li.

(Pao slides the door shut and everyone stares at each other.

Fade to a shot of a complex of apartments. It insight time now, and from a balcony in the shadows, hiding behind a clothesline, Jet spies on Zuko and Iroh in the apartment across from him. He can see them through the windows on both sides of the room, and shifts his gaze to either side as they talk. Iroh is standing by a counter with a teapot and Zuko is lying on a cot.)

Iroh: Would you like a pot of tea?
Zuko: We've been working in a tea shop all day. I'm sick of tea!
Iroh: Sick of tea? That's like being sick of breathing! (rummages through the cupboard beneath the counter) Have you seen our spark rocks to heat up the water?
Jet: They're not there. (Jet opens one of his palms to reveal two emerald green spark rocks) You'll have to firebend, old man. Where are you going?

(Jet narrows his eyes as Iroh walks away for a moment. Iroh soon returns with a pair of spark rocks.)

Iroh: I borrowed our neighbors, such kind people.

(Iroh strikes the spark rocks together near the small pile of twigs beneath the teapot. They quickly ignite and a small flame is created. Jet ducks behind the clothesline and leaves.

Fade to a shot of the Avatar's residence. Morning has come, and a blue jay is singing in the trees. Katara walks out from the front door, stretching and yawning. She grabs a roll of papers sticking out of a mail slot attached to the wall. Katara reads it briefly and gasps with excitement before running back inside. The others are all lounging around the upper part of the living room.)

Katara: I've got it! I know how we're gonna see the Earth King!
Toph: How are we supposed to do that? "One doesn't just pop in on the Earth King" (mimicking Joo Dee).
Katara: The King is having a party at the palace tonight for his pet bear.
Aang: You mean Platypus-Bear?
Katara: (duly) No, it just says "Bear".
Sokka: Certainly you mean his pet Skunk-Bear.
Toph: Or his Armadillo-Bear.
Aang: Gopher-Bear?
Katara: Just..."Bear".
Toph: This place is weird.

(After a moment of silence where all seem to agree with this last statement, Katara speaks.)

Katara: The palace will be packed. We can sneak in with the crowd.
Toph: (lying down) Won't work.
Katara: Why not?
Toph: Well, no offense to you simple country folk, but a real society crowd would spot you from a mile away. You've got no manners.

(Toph grabs a pastry from a bowl next to her and starts eating it.)

Katara: (hands on her hips) Excuse me? I've got no manners? You're not exactly lady fancy fingers.

(Toph burps.)

Toph: I learned proper society behavior and chose to leave it. (throws the half eaten pastry off to the side) You never learned anything. And frankly, it's a little too late.

(She picks her nose and flicks the snot off her finger.)

Sokka: Ah-Ha, but you learned it. You could teach us.
Aang: Yeah, I'm mastering every element. How hard could manners be (grabs a nearby curtain and drapes it around himself like a noble's robe, and begins talking in a very sophisticated manner) Good evening, Mr. Sokka Watertribe. Ms. Katara Watertribe. Lord Momo of the Momo Dynasty, your Momo-ness.

(Momo peeks out from a carpet he's hiding under and nods his head, the sound of a gong adding to the effect. Sokka is now wearing a curtain like Aang.)

Sokka: (mimicking a typical high class snob) Avatar Aang, how you do? Go on.

(Aang bows to Sokka and Sokka bows back. Aang tries to out do Sokka's bow with a deeper bow and Sokka returns this bow with an even deeper bow. Both of them try to bow at the same time, but they knock each other's foreheads' together and fall backward.)

Aang: Ow!
Toph: Katara might be able to pull it off, but you two would be lucky to pass as busboys.
Sokka: But I feel so fancy.

(Something small lands on Sokka's head.

Fade to a shot of the house. It has reached dusk now and the lights inside have been lit. Cut to a shot of Aang and Sokka's hands appearing on screen. Aang's is balled into a fist and Sokka is wiggling his fingers.)

Aang: Earth!
Sokka: Fire! Augh! Ooh!

(Sokka grumbles at having lost the game. Aang raises his hands in triumph before he flicks Sokka's forehead. The doors in the background slide open to reveal Katara and Toph wearing exquisite Earth Kingdom dresses and holding a fan. Their hair is tied around head dresses decorated with flowers, and both of them are wearing makeup. Toph and Katara stare at the boys calmly before giving in to a fit of giggles. Aang blushes and stares dreamily at the site of the two girls.)

Aang: Wow, you look beautiful.

(Sokka's hand inches towards Aang's head from off screen and delivers a flick to the airbender's forehead. Katara is about to say something when Toph places her fan in front of Katara's mouth.)

Toph: Don't talk to the commoners, Katara. First rule of society.
Katara: We'll get in the party, and then find a way to let you in through the side gate.

(Aang and Sokka watch as Toph and Katara leave the house. A moment later, the sound of a gong is heard as Momo walks past them, wearing one of the curtains as a cape. Aang looks at Sokka, who merely shrugs.

Cut to outside the tea shop. An officer walks in through the door. A guard walks in through the door. The camera zooms out to show Jet spying on the shop from an alley. Smellerbee and Longshot walk up behind him.)

Smellerbee: Jet, we need to talk.
Jet: What? Oh great, it's you guys. Where have you been? I could use some help with surveillance here.
Smellerbee: We've been talking, and we think you're becoming obsessed with this. It's not healthy.
Jet: Oh, really? You both think this?

(Longshot silently places a hand on Smellerbee's shoulder, indicating his agreement.)

Smellerbee: We came here to make a fresh start, but you won't let this go. Even though there's no real proof!

(She gestures at the tea shop across the street.)

Jet: Well, maybe if you'd help me.
Smellerbee: Jet, you've gotta stop this.
Jet: Maybe you've forgotten why we need to start over. Maybe you've forgotten about how the Fire Nation left us all homeless? How they wiped out all the people we loved. If you don't want to help me, I'll get the evidence on my own.

(Longshot and Smellerbee look down guiltily. Jet stalks off towards the tea shop.

Cut to inside the tea shop. Iroh is pouring a cup of tea for the officer that had walked in earlier.)

Officer: This is the best tea in the city!
Iroh: The secret ingredient is love.

(Iroh waves a hand through the steam coming from the teapot and walks towards the back of the shop where the owner is.)

Tea shop owner: I think you're due for a raise.

(Not a second later, Jet slams the tea shop door open and steps inside.)

Jet: I'm tired of waiting. These two men are firebenders!

(Jet points an accusing finger at Zuko and Iroh. The camera zooms in on the two, their attention fixated on the freedom fighter. Jet unsheathes his hook swords and prepares to fight. Iroh and Zuko quickly exchange a look, unsure of what to do. Fade to commercial.)



Act III

(The show returns to a shot outside the tea shop of Jet standing in the doorway, swords drawn and ready to fight. Everyone's attention is focused on him.)

Jet: I know they're firebenders! I saw the old man heating his tea!
Officer: He works in a tea shop.
Jet: He's a firebender, I'm telling you!
Officer: Drop your swords boy, nice and easy.

(The two officers sitting at one of tables stand up and prepare to take care of Jet.)

Jet: You'll have to defend yourself. Then everyone will know. Go ahead, show them what you can do.

(Jet poises his hook swords and slowly walks towards Iroh and Zuko. One of the officers prepares to draw the swords at his waist when Zuko steps in front of him and grabs the hilt instead.)

Zuko: You want a show? I'll give you a show.

(Zuko unsheathes the officer's double broadswords and enters his fighting stance. He then pulls a table in front of him with his foot and kicks it at Jet. Jet slices his hook swords into the table and jumps over it. As he lands, Jet swings both hook swords down at Zuko, who deflects the attack and jumps backward on to another table. Jet swings one sword through the middle of the table, slicing it in half. Zuko steps to one half of the table and balances on one foot. Jet follows up his attack by cutting through the legs on the half of the table Zuko is standing on. Zuko quickly hops on to the other half that is still standing and lands in a crane stance. Jet knocks this half to the ground, but Zuko jumps into the air and swings both broadswords at Jet's feet as he lands. Jet somersaults away and lands in a crouching position before charging forward at Zuko again. Zuko swings both of his swords at Jet. Just as both pairs of weapons clash together, the action pauses a moment and the screen flashes.

Cut to a shot of the palace gate. Several high class citizens are lined up and being admitted inside by a guard. He is checking out the invitation of one group before letting them pass. Toph and Katara are next in line and approach the guard.)

Guard: Invitation please.
Toph: I think this will do.

(Toph holds up the official seal of the Bei Fong family to the guard. The camera cuts to a closer, detailed shot of the seal.)

Guard: No entry without an invitation. Step out of line please.
Toph: (irritated) Look, the Pangs and the Yum Soon Hans are waiting in there for us. I'm going to have to tell them who didn't let me in.
Guard: (unyielding) Step out of line please.

(The guard points his finger to the side. Katara and Toph walk off disappointedly. The sound of a carriage grabs their attention. They see a high ranking government official step out of the carriage. Two guards bows to him. Katara smiles as an idea comes into her mind. She and Toph walk towards the official.)

Katara: Sir I'm sorry to bother you, but my cousin lost our invitations. (whispering) She's blind. Do you think you could help us? Our family's inside and I'm sure they're very worried.
Long Feng: (smiles and bows his head) I am honored, please come with me.

(Long Feng walks towards the guard at the entrance with Toph and Katara following closely. The guard bows to him and the three of them head into the palace. As they are walking in, Toph and Katara stick their tongues out at the guard while his back is turned.)

Toph and Katara: Nyah! Pssfft!!

(Shift to an overhead shot inside of the palace. Many guests are conversing around a long dining table with an assortment of foods placed upon it. At one end of the table is the Earth King's bear eating a steak, his drool dripping of his chin. He is dressing in a yellow shirt and a green hat. Seated to either side of him are two guests.)

Guest 1: He's taking all the good stuff!
Guest 2: Quiet, you don't know what I had to do to get seats this near the bear!

(The bear swipes what remains of the steak into the first guest's face before pouncing onto the table and devouring a large plate of meat in front of him. Cut to a close shot of the bear gorging. He pulls his head away as Toph, Katara and Long Feng walk into the hall.)

Long Feng: It's beautiful, isn't it? By the way, I'm Long Feng. I'm a cultural minister to the king.
Katara: I'm Kwa mai, and this is Dung. (Toph frowns and tugs at a string hanging from Katara's headdress.) Ow!
Long Feng: Now where is your family? I'd love to meet them.
Katara: Um... I don't see 'em right now. But I'm sure we'll find them soon. Thanks for all your help.

(Katara and Toph walk away from Long Feng. A moment later, Long Feng mysteriously appears in front of the two girls.)

Long Feng: Don't worry, as your escort it would be dishonorable to abandon you ladies without finding your families first. We'll keep looking.

(Long Feng turns around and begins leading Toph and Katara.

Cut to outside the palace. Two guards are stationed at the gates. The camera zooms out and Aang peeks around the pedestal of a statue of a lion. Cut to a shot of Aang and Sokka peeking around both sides of the pedestal.)

Aang: Where are they?

(Aang and Sokka duck back behind the pedestal. Momo is there with them.)

Sokka: Look, I came up with a backup plan. (picks Momo up by the armpits We dress Momo like a ghost, OK? (begins waving Momo through the air) He flies by the guards creating a distraction, then we blast a hole in the wall... (Aang stands up and peers over the pedestal)
Aang: Or, we could go in with these guys. Toph said we might pass as busboys.

(Cut to a shot of a carriage parked in front of the gate. Sokka peeks over the pedestal and the camera zooms in on a few busboys unloading supplies from the back of it and bringing them inside. Cut to a shot of Sokka and Aang. Momo is clinging to Sokka's head.)

Sokka: OK, but remember that Momo ghost plan. I think it's a winner.

(Sokka and Aang sink back behind the pedestal.

Shift scenes to outside the tea shop. Zuko bursts through the door and tumbles into the street. Jet runs after him and does a few spins before striking at Zuko with both swords. Zuko manages to block the strike and both combatants lock swords.)

Jet: You must be getting tired of using those swords. Why don't you go ahead and firebend at me.

(They both struggle to gain control and walk off to the side. Iroh is standing in the doorway and watching, worried. Off screen, the sound of swords clanging and the fighters grunting is heard.)

Iroh: Please son, you're confused. You don't know what you're doing!

(Cut back to Zuko and Jet. Zuko swings at Jet, but Jet catches Zuko's broad sword with the ends of his hook swords, spins around and deflects it to the side. Zuko spins with it and tries to counter attack, but Jet hooks the ends of his swords together and begins them at Zuko in large circular motions. Zuko retreats back a few steps to avoid the bladed hilt.)

Jet: Bet you wish he'd help you out with a little fire blast right now.

(As Jet swings at Zuko's feet, Zuko stabs one of his broad swords through the hilt, pinning it to the ground. Jet looks at it with annoyance before focusing back on Zuko.)

Zuko: You're the one who needs help.

(Both fighters are down to one sword each. Jet lets go of his pinned hook sword and retreats a step. He turns in a circle and tries to swipe at Zuko, but Zuko quickly advances and swings his sword at Jet in a horizontal motion. Jet pulls his attack just in time to bend backward and avoid Zuko's blade. The scene goes into slow motion as Zuko's broad sword passes over Jet, cutting the wheat straw sticking out of Jet's mouth in half. The scene replays, only this time the shot is a close up of the wheat straw.

The scene goes back to normal speed as Jet regains balance and jumps backward on to the edge of a well. By now several people are in the street watching the fight.)

Jet: You see that? The Fire Nation is trying to silence me. It'll never happen.

(Jet hooks his sword on to a wooden beam above the well and swings forward at Zuko, attacking him with a flying kick.

Shift scenes back to inside the palace. Aang and Sokka are dressed as busboys and are serving guests. Aang is pouring a drink and Sokka is serving food on a plate. Both of them stand back to back. Momo's tail is sticking out from under Aang's hat.)

Aang: Where are Toph and Katara?
Sokka: Forget about them, just keep an eye out for the King.

(Momo's tail rises up to Sokka's face and begins wagging back and forth.)

Aang: I don't know what he looks like.
Sokka: You know, "royal", flowing robe, fancy jewelry.

(Sokka grabs Momo's tail forcibly, causing the hair on it to stand up on end. Cut to a panning right shot of the crowd of guests, who all fit Sokka's description.)

Aang: (voice over) That could be anyone.

(The camera cuts back to Aang, then quickly pans right to show Toph standing right next to him.)

Toph: Another crab puff please.
Aang: You found us.
Toph: I'd know your little footsteps anywhere Twinkletoes.

(Sokka smiles and presents his tray to Toph, who grabs a crab puff and begins to nibble on it. Katara joins the group. Aang blushes when he sees her.)

Sokka: (sarcastically) Thanks for letting us in.
Katara: Sorry, but the guy who escorted us in, won't let us out of his sight.

(Sokka peers behind Katara, trying to spot the escort.)

Sokka: What guy?

(Cut to an overhead shot of the group. Long Feng is nowhere in sight. Joo Dee approaches the group from off screen. Her normally cheerful demeanor is replaced with anxiety.)

Joo Dee: What are you doing here? You have to leave immediately, or we'll all be in terrible trouble.

(Joo Dee tries to push Sokka out of the way, but he blocks her with his tray.)

Sokka: Not until we see the King.
Joo Dee: You don't understand. You must go.

(Joo Dee shoves Sokka into Aang, causing him to spill the contents of the pitcher he is holding on to a guest.)

Female Guest: Aarrhhh! Oh!
Aang: Sorry! No, don't shout.

(Aang uses his hands and foot to airbend a gust at the guest. His hat is blown off, along with Momo. It dries her off, but also turns her hair, clothes and makeup into a mess. Aang smiles sheepishly. The guest is briefly shocked, but smiles in amazement.)

Female Guest: (inawe) The Avatar. Ooh, I didn't known the Avatar would be here.

(All the guests' attention is now focused on Aang. Joo Dee's large, happy smile quickly turns sour and is replaced by a frown and a look of pure dread. Aang looks around at the guests as Momo hides back under the hat on the floor and slinks away. Aang blushes and waves at the crowd, laughing nervously. Sokka leans in towards Aang.)

Sokka: (whispering)You keep their attention while I look for the King.
Aang: Watch this everybody!

(Aang leap out of his busboy clothes and on to the long dining table as Sokka walks off into the crowd. Aang swings his arms over the guests' drinks, waterbending the liquid out of the cups. He jumps onto a pitcher and balances on top of it. Aang brings the liquid above his head and creates a swirling multicolored ball. The crowd 'oohs' at the spectacle. The king's bear growls with delight at Aang's antics.

Cut to outside the tea shop. Zuko growls as he swings his broadsword at Jet. Jet parries the attack and steps to Zuko's side and the two end up back to back. The camera orbits around Zuko and Jet as they attempt to strike at the opponent behind them, but neither can get past the other's defense. Cut to a shot of two Dai Li walking through the crowd and towards the swordfight.)

Dai Lee Guard 1: Drop your weapons!

(Zuko and Jet step away and face each other. Zuko lowers his sword and Jet points at Zuko and Iroh.)

Jet: Arrest them. They're Firebenders.
Iroh: This poor boy is confused. We're just simple refugees.
Tea shop owner: (pointing at Jet) This young man wrecked my tea shop, and assaulted my employees.
Officer: It's true sir. We saw the whole thing. This crazy kid attacked the finest tea maker in the city.
Iroh: (blushing) Oh ho ho. That's very sweet.

(The two Dai Li walk up behind Jet, who looks at them angrily.)

Dai Lee Guard 2: Come with us son.

(Jet swings his hook sword at the Dai Li guard, but he catches the sword with his hand covered in stones. The guard then disarms Jet and both guards pull the boy's arms behind his back, binding his wrists together using the stones on the palms of their gloves. They drag Jet away towards a wagon designed for holding captured criminals.)

Jet: You don't understand! They're Fire Nation! You have to believe me!

(Zuko and Iroh watch as Jet is being put into the wagon. The crowd begins to disperse. On his knees, Jet looks up as the doors slam shut. The people left in the street watch the wagon roll away. Longshot and Smellerbee look on, hidden within the crowd, and silently walk out of sight.

Shift scenes to the palace. Two lines of guards walk into the hall. Eight of them are carrying a curtained platform. The Earth King sits quietly on the platform, and though the curtain veils him from view, a close up reveals his appearance. He has a young, pointed face and narrow eyes. A pair of round spectacles rests on his nose, and he dresses in traditional Earth Kingdom colors and patterns. Cut to a shot of the crowd as they marvel in the presence of their host and ruler. The camera pans left as Sokka sneaks through the crowd and attempts to get a better view of the king. Cut to the line of guards as they place the platform down and face the guests. Sokka looks over at Aang and points at the earth King.)

Sokka: Aang, the Earth King.

(The camera quickly shifts to Aang, who is entertaining the king's bear with some waterbending. Noticing him, Aang bends an air scooter and whisks down the table.)

Aang: Greetings your majesty.

(Three guests pull their food and drinks off the table before Aang can run over them with his air scooter. Cut back to the procession of guards and the Earth King. The platform is carried off while a line of guards walk up to the long dining table. Sokka exits the crowd and tries to follow the king, but two Dai Li guards grab him and begin leading him away, pulling his arms behind his back.)

Sokka: Hey, let me go.

(Cut to a shot of a pillar in the hall. A Dai Li steps out from behind it and throws his hands out, causing the stones covering his hands to fly forward. Cut to Katara and Toph. While Katara is looking away, the stone gloves of the Dai Li grab Toph and pull her backward, covering her mouth to keep her silent. A second later, another pair of stone gloves grabs Katara and pulls her back. Cut to a Dai Li guard standing watch. The camera shifts down to show Momo still hiding under the busboy hat and trying to sneak past, his ear and tail sticking out from under. The Dai Li reaches down and pulls the hat off. Momo looks up with surprise.

Shift back to Aang who has reached the other end of the dining table on his air scooter, knocking over several dishes. He dismounts the scooter and holds his arms up in triumph. Long Feng walks up to Aang from behind the line of guards and addresses him.)

Long Feng: Avatar, it is a great honor to meet you. I am Long Feng, Grand Secretary of Ba Sing Se and head of the Dai Li. I'd like to talk to you. Your friends will be waiting for us in the library.

(Long Feng gestures for Aang to follow him and heads toward the library. Aang hesitates for a moment before hopping off the table and following. Cut to a shot of the library's large double doors shutting. The camera zooms out to show Aang and his friends facing Long Feng, who is sitting in front of a hearth that illuminates the area with a green flame.

Sokka: Why won't you let us talk to the King? We have information that could defeat the Fire Nation!
Long Feng: The Earth King has no time to get involved with political squabbles and the day to day minutia of military activities.
Aang: This could be the most important thing he has ever heard.

(The camera shifts behind Aang's party and pans slowly to the right. Long Feng is always visible seated in front of them as the camera passes by each member.)

Long Feng: What's most important to his royal majesty is maintaining the cultural heritage of Ba Sing Se. All his duties relate to issuing decrees on such matters. It's my job to oversea the rest of the city's resources, including the military.
Katara: So the King is just a figurehead.
Toph: (furious) He's your puppet!
Long Feng: Oh, no, no! His majesty is an icon, a god to his people. He can't sully his hands with the hourly change of an endless war.
Sokka: But we found out about a solar eclipse that will leave the Fire Nation defenseless. You could lead an invasion...
Long Feng: (stands up suddenly, cutting Sokka off) Enough, I don't want to hear your ridiculous plan! (there is a brief shot of Sokka with a confused and hurt expression) It is the strict policy of Ba Sing Se that the war not be mentioned within the walls. Constant news of an escalating war will throw the citizens of Ba Sing Se into a state of panic.

(The scene fades to white and shifts to a dark, stone room. A ray a light shines through under a door. The door slides open and two of the Dai Li drag Jet inside, sitting him in a stone chair at the other side. They bind his arms down using square stones similar to the stones that make up the Dai Li's gloves.)

Jet: You have to believe me, they're firebenders! They won't stop until they win the war.

(Several square stones circle Jet's head and clamp down on his skull, holding it in place.)

Dai Li Agent: Calm down, you're safe now.

(The Dai Li agent stands in front of Jet, surrounded by a metal track. From behind him appears a small orange lantern attached to the track. It travels around the track and passes the camera, causing a white flash that cuts back to Long Feng.)

Long Feng: Our economy would be ruined. Our peaceful way of life, our traditions would disappear.

(There is another white flash and the scene shifts back to the lamp circling the Dai Li agent.)

Dai Li: There's no war in Ba Sing Se.
Jet: What are you talking about? Where do you think all the refugees come from? You can't hide it.

(Jet can only watch as the lamp passes by his face. The screen flashes white and cuts back to Long Feng.)

Long Feng: In silencing talk of conflict, Ba Sing Se remains a peaceful, orderly utopia. The last one on Earth.

(Aang and his friends can only stare at Long Feng with a mix of shock and horror at this revelation. The screen flashes white again. Cut to a close up of Jet. A circle of stones covers his mouth, muffling his protests. The lamp passes by his eyes again. Cut to a shot of the Dai Li agent standing within the circular track as the lamp revolves.)

Dai Li: There is no war within the walls. Here we are safe. Here we are free.

(Jet's eyes widen and his protests become silent as the hypnosis begins to affect him. The screen flashes, then cut to Aang and his friends.)

Katara: You can't keep the truth from all these people. They have to know.

(Aang steps forward and points a finger at Long Feng.)

Aang: (defiantly) I'll tell them. I'll make sure everyone knows!
Long Feng: Until now, you've been treated as our honored guest. (steps forward and bends down to look Aang in the eye. Aang stares back at Long Feng with loathing) But from now on, you will be watched every moment by Dai Li agents. If you mention the war to anyone, you will be expelled from the city. (turns around and walks over to the hearth with the green fire) I understand you've been looking for your bison. It would be quite a shame if you were not able to complete your quest. (Aang appears frightened for a moment, but his expression changes to that of silent anger) Now Joo Dee will show you home.

(Long Feng sits back down as the library doors open and Joo Dee walks in. Cut to a shot from behind Joo Dee as she faces Aang's party. Her hair is a different style than before. The group looks at her with surprise. They do not recognize this woman.)

Joo Dee 2: Come with me, please.
Katara: What happened to Joo Dee?

(Cut to a shot of Joo Dee 2's face. She is clearly not the same Joo Dee that showed Aang around Ba Sing Se.)

Joo Dee 2: I'm Joo Dee. I'll be your host as long as you're in our wonderful city.

(Joo Dee 2 smiles cheerfully at the group in the same artificial way as her predecessor. The screen fades to white.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence includes clips from "City of Walls and Secrets".]



The Tale of Toph and Katara
Written by: Joann Estoesta and Lisa Wahlander

(The title slide for the tale fades into an exterior shot of the gang's house in Ba Sing Se. It then cuts to a shot of Aang's head in a mirror covered with shaving cream as he shaves it off with a razor blade. Shot pans left to Sokka's head in the mirror to show he has a few hairs growing above his lip which he cuts off with the end of his machete. He then clicks his tongue and points at his reflection. Camera pans left again to show Katara in the mirror as she fixes together her hair loops. Once they are placed, she smiles and the camera cuts back to show the whole room, with them all staring at the mirror, and Momo off to the side on a stool giving himself to bath like a cat. Shot cuts to a dark room where, Toph, her hair a horrible mess, lays face-down on her bed, her blanket sloppily laying over her. A sliver of light cuts through the darkness as the door opens. Katara enters the room and gasps at the sight.)

Katara: Huh! Toph, aren't you gonna to get ready for the day?

(Toph whips her head up causing her wild bed-head-hair to fly about. She quickly spits a large loogy into a nearby spittoon which spins upon impact. Cut to Katara's face as she looks shocked, then cut back to Toph as she gets to her feet and brushes a large amount of dust off her sleeping shirt.)

Toph: I'm ready.
Katara: You're not gonna wash up? You've got a little dirt on your... everywhere actually.
Toph: You call it dirt. I call it a healthy coating of earth.
Katara: Hmmm. You know what we need? A girl's day out!
Toph: Do I have to?
Katara: It'll be fun.

(Cut to outside of a large building that is decorated with pictures of flowers and plants, Toph and Katara stand near the entrance. Fancily dressed woman in beautiful robes walk out and smile at each other.)

Toph: The Fancy Lady Day Spa? Sounds like my kinda place.
Katara: Are you ready for some serious pampering?
Toph: Sure Katara, whatever you say. As long as they don't touch my feet.

(They walk in, Toph with her head hung low. Cut to an interior shot where Katara sits happily having her feet scrubbed. Shot cuts again to a close-up of Toph's foot as the attendants, who have to hold the girl down, are hard at work trying to scrape the massive amounts of dirt off her feet. A close up of Toph's angry face show she isn't pleased with this.)

Toph: Arrrr! Rrrrr! Errrr!

(Cut to a shot of an empty hallway within the spa as suddenly an explosion of dust erupts from one of the doorways as the frame is crumpled and an attendant flies out and hits the opposite wall, Toph having just performed some earthbending apparently out of annoyance. The shot cuts to Toph and Katara each taking mud baths, with mud covering their faces in a mask, cucumber slices over their eyes, and their heads rapped in towels. An attendant with arms full of fresh towels walks over to Toph. Cut to Toph's face as she breaths in then exhales which it apparently some form of earthbending as the mud on her face begins to move strangely and creating a scary appearance. The attendant, having seen this, screams and runs off. Katara and Toph laugh, as the mud around Toph's mouth forms a large goofy smile.)

Toph and Katara: Hahaha!

(Shot fades into a pile of rocks in the sauna that Toph and Katara now occupy. Toph kicks the ground once causing a rock from the cold pile to fly onto the pile of hot rocks. Katara, using waterbending, slashes the hot rocks with some water creating steam. They both sigh.

Fade into Toph walking down the streets of Ba Sing Se with the front of her hair, which usually hangs to cover her forehead, now combed back behind her ears and her face now with lots of make-up.)

Toph: Well, that wasn't so bad. I'm not usually into that stuff, but I actually feel... girly.
Katara: (Cut back to show them both walking together, Katara's face has make-up as well.) I'm glad, it's about time we did something fun together.

(Cut to a shot of the two crossing a stone bridge over a creek. As they do, they pass three girls going the other direction. They wear fancy dresses and robes, one sporting a fashionable umbrella.)

1st Mean Girl: Wow, great makeup.
Toph: Thanks.
1st Mean Girl: For a clown!

(Toph's face drops into a frown as the stop walking.)

Katara: Don't listen to them, let's just keep walking.
Star: I think she looks cute. Like that time we put that sweater on your pet poodle monkey.
3rd Mean Girl: Good one, Star!
Katara: Let's go Toph.
Toph: No, no. That was a good one! "Like your poodle-monkey"... Ha ha! You know what else is a good one?

(Toph pounds the ground once causing dust to rumble up as her earthbending shoots across the bridge to where the girls stand. A hole opens up in the stone bridge where Toph's earthbending reaches them and all three fall through into the creek.)

Girls: Ahhh!
Katara: Now that was funny.

(With one move of her arm, Katara waterbends a huge wave that sweeps the girls away and down stream as they scream. Cut to a shot of Toph walking away from the bridge as Katara jogs to catch up.)

Katara: Those girls don't know what they're talking about.
Toph: It's ok. One of the good things about being blind is I don't have to waste my time worrying about appearances. (Cut to her frowning face.) I don't care what I look like. I'm not looking for anyone's approval. I know who I am. (They stop walking, shot cuts back to show the both of them.)
Katara: That's what I really admire about you, Toph. You're so strong and confident and self assured. And I know it doesn't matter, but... you're really pretty.
Toph: (Smiling) I am?
Katara: Yeah. You are.

(Shot cuts to show them walking away together from behind.)

Toph: I'd return the compliment, but I have no idea what you look like.
Katara: (Laughs)
Toph: Thank you, Katara. (She punches her in the shoulder in a friendly way.)
Katara: Ow!



The Tale of Iroh
Written by: Andrew Huebner

(Title card for this tale fades into a shot of a marketplace in Ba Sing Se from overhead. Cut to a shot of the street that shows Iroh walking pleasantly down the lane and stopping to examine a basket being sold by a merchant.)

Merchant: If this is for a romantic picnic, may I suggest this lavender one?
Iroh: No, it is not a romantic picnic, but it is a special occasion. (He hands the merchant a few coins and picks up the basket. Iroh turns to leave the market stall when a closed flower in a vase catches his eye. He slides the vase out of the sunlight and into the shade) The moonflower likes partial shade.

(Iroh bows to the merchant and walks away. Shot fades into Iroh examining another merchant's stall which sells 'liuqins', which are a type of Asian lute which is a stringed instrument. The sound of a crying child catches Iroh's attention and he turns around to see a boy sobbing the middle of the street and his mother trying to console him.)

Child: (crying) Wahh!
Woman: Shhh. It's ok. Shhh.

(The sound of music being played on one of the liuqins is herd as Iroh approaches, singing a tune with a smile on his face. He gets down on one knee next to the boy as he sings.)

Iroh: (singing)
Leaves from the vine, falling so slow.
Like fragile, tiny shells,
Drifting in the foam.
Little soldier boy, come marching home.
Brave soldier boy, comes marching home.

(The boy's frown instantly turns to a smile as he reaches up and pulls Iroh's long beard.)

Iroh: Yeowch!
Child: Hahaha!

(Iroh smiles and pets his beard. The boy's mother takes her son by the hand and leads him away as Iroh stand and looks after them with a very pleasant look on his face. Scene fades to a courtyard as Iroh enters to pass through. Four boys are in the courtyard with a white ball playing a game. One of the boys hits the ground with his foot and the ball shoots up and back down. He kicks it and then follows up with some earthbending. A patch of earth rises to create a path for the ball as it rolls along. Another player earthbends to impede the path of the ball before it reaches the goal. This causes the ball to launch up and into the direction Iroh is standing. He moves out of the way just in time, but the ball rips through the window directly behind where he was. A crash and a loud voice can be herd from inside.)

Angry Man: Hey!

(Iroh walks over to the boys as they gather around him to listen to what he has to say.)

Iroh: It is usually best to admit mistakes when they occur, and to seek to restore honor-

(Loud smashes are herd and all five of them look up, startled. Shot cuts to show the window as a very large body and head are visible through the hole.)

Angry Man: When I am through with you kids, the window won't be the only thing that's broken!

(Cut back to Iroh and the boys.)

Iroh: -but not this time. Run!

(The boys and Iroh all run in different directions. Shot changes to show Iroh running down the marketplace street quickly. He hides in an alley, places the basket down, and the shot changes to shot him looking around the corner to see if he's being chased.)

Mugger: You. Give me all your money!

(Shot changes to show a messy looking man with a dagger pointed directly at Iroh standing behind him, but the shot pans down to show his legs bent at a very odd angle as he stands.)

Iroh: What are you doing?
Mugger: I'm mugging you!
Iroh: With that stance?
Mugger: Wha- What are you talking about? Just give me your money, old man!
Iroh: With a poor stance you are unbalanced, and you can be easily knocked over.

(In one swift move, Iroh grabs the arm of the mugger and disarms him, while simultaneously proving his point by pushing his attacker and knocking him to the ground).

Mugger: Ugh!

(Iroh twirls the dagger in his hand then helps the man to his feet.)

Iroh: With a solid stance, you are a much more serious threat. (Iroh demonstrates a proper stance for the mugger. The mugger attempts to imitate Iroh's stance, but is still not assuming the correct form. Iroh walks over to him and holds his attacker's head still while he adjusts the man's stance by nudging his backside forward with his foot. After helping him assume the correct form, Iroh is now pleased with the man's stance.) Much better! But to tell you the truth, you do not look like the criminal type.
Mugger: I know. I'm... I'm just confused.

(The next shot shows a close up of the mugger's hands holding a cup, while off screen Iroh pours hot, steamy tea for the man.)

Mugger: So you really think I could be a good masseur?

(Shot cuts back to show the two still in the alley, sitting on the ground sharing some tea and talking.)

Iroh: Of course!
Mugger: This is so great! No one has ever believed in me.
Iroh: While it is always best to believe in one's self, a little help from others can be a great blessing.

(The scene fades into the next which is a shot of a tree on a hill within the city as the sun is setting; very similar to the tree from Iroh's flashback in Bitter Work. Leaves gently fall from the tree as Iroh approaches the trunk and looks out over the city as a softer version of Iroh's liuqin music from earlier plays in the background. Iroh places the basket down and removes his hat. He then rests on his knees and piles some rocks at the tree's base. Searching though her basket, he removes several things and places them at the bottom of the tree. He pulls out a sheet of paper and looks at it for a few seconds, closing his eyes and bowing his head, before placing it down as well. Finally he pulls two joss sticks, which are sticks of incense that burn, and lights them with his fingers by clicking the tips and places them down as well. The shot then shows that Iroh has just made a small memorial for his passed son, Lu Ten. The memorial is little more then the burning joss sticks, a few apples, and a bag of unknown contents. Most importantly, a sketched picture of Lu Ten sits against the rocks. He was quite handsome and had the same hair features that his father once did.)

Iroh: Happy Birthday my son. (Cut to his face as he begins to cry.) If only I could have helped you. (He begins to sing his song from earlier, only this time he has difficulty keeping his voice from cracking under his grief.)
Leaves from the vine, falling so slow.
Like fragile, tiny shells,
Drifting in the foam.
Little soldier boy, come marching home.
Brave soldier boy, comes marching home.

(The tale ends with a freeze frame of Iroh under the tree sitting atop the hill. The images in the scene blur into a beautiful ethereal impression of color and form. This all happens in time with the music. Then a message appears during the final notes of the song. The message pays homage to the life of the talented actor who voiced Uncle Iroh.)

"In Honor Of Mako"



The Tale of Aang
Written by: Gary Scheppke

(This tale's title card fades into an aerial shot of the city as Aang soars down over it on his glider. The shot cuts to a mostly deserted street, save for one man walking alone, as Aang lands on it, twirling his glider back into a staff. Shot cuts to Aang walking down the street, which is lined on both sides with various cages and pens built into the rock. Aang passes each pen and looks in to see different creatures looking sad and depressed, his expression matching theirs. He stops and looks up into a cage where a group of dragon flies, which look like very small dragons with small wings like an insect's. Shot cuts to him looking down into another pen which is a pit to see another baboon-like creature lying on the ground, apparently very bored. Shot cuts to an armadillo lion gnawing at the bars that keep him in. It looks up as Aang approaches.)

Aang: (Kneeling down and holding his hand out) Hey there, fella. You look hungry. (The creature roars loudly causing Aang to jump back in surprise) Ahh!

(The armadillo lion curls up into a ball and rolls away in its pen as the zookeeper walks behind Aang, sweeping.)

Zookeeper: Hm! They are hungry. (Shot cuts to the zookeeper and Aang walking together through the zoo) The Dai Li won't give me any money because the kids stopped coming. And the kids won't come because my zoo's nasty and broke.
Aang: (Looking into a cage) What kind of animal is that?
Zookeeper: Oh, that's rabbiroo. I wish I could get her a big open prairie like she likes. (Cut to show the depressed creature) I'd let her hop her way to happiness.
Aang: (Smiling) Let's do it!
Zookeeper: Say again?
Aang: There's a big open space right outside the walls of the city.
Zookeeper: But how are you gonna transport all these wild critters?
Aang: (Grinning) Don't worry. I'm great with animals.

(With a loud crash, the shot cuts to a group of monkey-like creatures wreaking havoc in one of the shops in the city, throwing pottery and breaking things. The owner comes in swinging a broom in an attempt to save his shop and manages to send one of them flying, Shot cuts to the creatures fleeing the shop and into the street just as an elephant mandrill comes stampeding down it while people run for their lives. In the background another group of people come running out of an ally covering their heads to escape the dragon flies that fly over them. A platypus bear enters the street and stands on its legs, swinging and growling as more people scream and run away. It pursues a group down an ally and the armadillo lion comes rolling in and runs off in another direction. Cut to a shot of the rabbiroo devouring cabbages from a pile. The shot cuts back to show that the creature is assaulting none other than the Cabbage Merchant's cart who is desperately trying to save his beloved cabbages.)

Cabbage Merchant: MY CABB-- (The rabbiroo looks up at him with a cabbage in its mouth. It chews it a bit and returns to the cart.) --oh, forget it!

(Shot cuts to several people in the street covering their heads as dragon flies hover over them. Aang descends into the street and uses his staff to shoo the creatures away with airbending. He uses a large blast of air to knock all of them out of the street.)

Aang: (Scratching his head) This was so much easier in my head!

(Getting an idea, Aang snaps his finger and reaches into his shirt to pull out his bison whistle. He flips the whistle into the air and, using airbending, inhales a great amount of air. Then, catching the whistle, he blows into it with huge force. The whistle squeals louder and higher than usual, as the shot pull back to show a shockwave of sorts emitting from where Aang is and through the city as the whistle's sound spreads. Shot cuts to the monkey-like creatures from earlier, one with a pot over its head still, which hear the sound and run off. The dragon flies, who apparently found new people to terrorize, hear it and abandon their targets to investigate. The rabbiroo, still devouring cabbages as the Cabbage Merchant sobs in the background, leaves the cart as she hears the whistle as well.

Shot cuts to Aang riding his air scooter down a street blowing the bison whistle. Cut to an ally where we see Aang fly by on the main street, a large stampede of creatures follow him, with a very slow turtle seal bringing up the rear. Shot cuts to the zookeeper talking with two guards at the wall.)

Zookeeper: But you have to open this gate!
Guard 1: Or what?
Zookeeper: (Pointing behind himself) Or that!

(Cut to Aang quickly approaching on his air scooter, still blowing the whistle, with a huge number of animals chasing him.)

Guard 2: (Cut back to him standing by the wall) Open the gate!

(Shot pulls back to show the massive wall of Ba Sing Se opening to allow Aang through. As Aang reaches the opening, he stops blowing the whistle and jumps off his scooter and onto his glider. The creatures plow through the opening as he soars up and over the wall. On the other side, the creatures are shown coming out of the opening and starting to spread out as the run in all directions. Cut to shot that shows Aang soar down behind the running animals and onto his air scooter again. As he rides, he punches the ground causing a large wall of earth to rise as he rides in a large circle creating a pen to block the fleeing animals. Once he finishes, he jumps off his scooter and lands in the center of the pen he just made. He earthbends again, causing a square portion of the ground to descend and create a small pit. He turns around and brings his arms up high to cause a large pillar of earth to rise, then turns and punches outward which, when the shot pulls back, shows him making more walls to separate the animals.

Shot cuts to show, apparently after Aang had finished, a large area of rock walls and pens all situated like a zoo made from Aang's earthbending. Shot cuts to show the guards and the zookeeper entering, all looking amazed at what Aang just did. A group of kids, all laughing and smiling, push past them and run in. Shot cuts to show the entirety of Aang's new zoo as people move around the newly formed pens and examine the animals. Shot cuts to show the rabbiroo drinking from a pond then looking up at one of the guests as three infant rabbiroo poke up from its pouch. Cut to Aang speaking with the zookeeper beside one of the pens.)

Aang: Well, Mr. Zookeeper, how do you like your new facilities?
Zookeeper: Excellent job, Avatar. You should think about working with animals for a living.

(Aang looks behind him as a guest's voice catches his ear.)

Child visitor: (Pointing into one of the pens) Mommy, Ms. Snowflake got out of the house again.
Adult Visitor: (Shot shows a hissing cat in of the pens) Fluffykins (Cut to the guest's face) What are you doing down there?

(Shot cuts to show the cat hissing at the elephant mandrill it's sharing a pen with.)

Zookeeper: On second thought, (Cut to him and Aang) you should probably stick to saving people.
Aang: (Laughs nervously)



The Tale of Sokka
Written by: Lauren Macmullan

(Tale fades into Sokka walking down a candle-lit street at night. He reaches back and pulls his boomerang from its sheath, throws it into the sky, and catches it as it comes back. Shot cuts to him walking past a building and into the ally beside it. In the ally, a man struggles with his ostrich horse. Sokka passes them, and by the windows of the building, as he hears voices from inside. Intrigued, he turns and sticks his head inside the window.)

Sokka: What's this?

(The shot from Sokka's perspective shows the rooms to be a classroom of sorts with a stage. The girls that occupy the class all wear beautiful dresses and head pieces. There is a student on stage reading her writings to the class.)

Student on stage: Through all the long night, winter moon glows with bright love, sleet her silver tears.
Sokka: (His head resting on his hands, looking pleased) Ahh, poetry.

(Shot cuts to the ally again, as the ostrich horse, who is still struggling with his handler, kicks backward and hits Sokka right his the behind sending him flying through the window and into the class.)

Students: (startled) Oooh!

(The girls all gasp in shock as Sokka hangs from the window, part of the frame around his chest. He starts to apologize and he pulls himself into the room and falls onto the stage.)

Sokka: I am so sorry. Something struck me in the rear. I just... wound up... here?
Students: (Laughing and clapping)

(Sokka grins as he stands in front of the class. The woman on the far right of the group of girls stands up, applauding softly but looking stern.)

Madame Macmu-Ling: (Applauds Sokka) Five seven then five, syllables mark a Haiku, (bowing her head to him) remarkable oaf.
Sokka: (Looking annoyed, then ponders this for a second.) They call me Sokka, that is in the Water Tribe, (counting the next five syllables on his fingers as he says them) I am not an oaf.

(The girls laugh but Macmu-Ling still looks stern and does not applaud this time.)

Madame Macmu-Ling: Chittering monkey, in the spring he climbs treetops, and thinks himself tall.
Students: Ooooh.
Sokka: You think you're so smart, with your fancy little words, this is not so hard.
Students: Ooooh!
Madame Macmu-Ling: (Walking up to Sokka on stage) Whole seasons are spent mastering the form, the style, none calls it easy!
Sokka: I calls it easy! Like I paddle my canoe, (Turns around and paddles his behind once) I'll paddle yours too!
Students: (Laughing)
Madame Macmu-Ling: There's nuts and there's fruits, (Pulls a plumb from her sleeve and drops it to the ground) in fall the clinging plumb drops, always to be squashed.

(She steps on the plumb, squashing it.)

Sokka: (Making different arm motions) Squish-squash, sling that slang. I'm always right back at ya, like my... (drawing and presenting his boomerang to her face) boomerang!
Students: (Laughing)

(Macmu-Ling looks annoyed but walks off stage and back to her seat as Sokka turns to the class again and raises his arms up to silence the laughter.)

Sokka: (Sheathing his boomerang and making more arm movements) That's right I'm Sokka, it's pronounced with an "okka", young ladies, I rocked ya!

(This time his words are met with total silence as he stares over the class who look annoyed at him. Cut to his face as he begins to count his fingers, attempting to figure out of he had too many syllables. Sure enough, he realizes his final line contained six syllables instead of five. A large man approaches him and grabs him up by the collar.)

Security: Uh, that's one too many syllables there, bub.

(Picking Sokka completely up, he throws him head first across the room and out the door. Outside, he hits the ground with a thud and sits up holding his head.)

Sokka: ...poetry.



The Tale of Zuko
Written by: Andrew Huebner

(The tale fades into an exterior shot of Pao's teashop, the place where Zuko and Iroh both work under the guise of Lee and Mushi respectively. Cut to a shot of the inside where Zuko walks down the shop with a tray of cups and looking over his shoulder once at something off-screen. He walks up behind his uncle who is on a ladder, stacking things on a shelf behind the counter.)

Zuko: Uncle, we have a problem. (Iroh descends the ladder,) One of the customers is on to us. Don't look now, (Cut to a shot of a very attractive girl sitting in the corner of the shop sipping tea.) but there is a girl over there at the corner table. She knows we're Fire Nation. (Cut back to the pair, Zuko forces Iroh to turn around as he had turned to look. Iroh sports a grin on his face.) Didn't I say don't look!
Iroh: (From off-screen as the shot cuts back to show the girl.) You're right Zuko. I've seen that girl in here quite a lot. (Cut back to them.) Seems to me she has quite a little crush on you.
Zuko: (Reeling back in surprise) What?!
Jin: (From behind both of them suddenly, causing them to part to show her.) Thank you for the tea. (She hands Zuko a few coins who takes them and turns away from her.) What's your name?
Zuko: (Turning back to her) My name's Lee. My Uncle and I just moved here.
Jin: Hi Lee, my name is Jin. Thank you and, well, I was wondering if you would like to go out sometime?
Iroh: (Before the stunned Zuko can respond) He'd love to!
Jin: Great! I will meet you in front of the shop at sundown.

(Jin walks away, leaving Zuko standing bewildered as his uncle throws an arm around his shoulders with a large, goofy grin on his face again.

Fade into an exterior shot of the shop again, only at nighttime now. The door opens as Zuko steps out into the street. He is wearing a very handsome green outfit, a contrast to his typical brown every-day clothing. Though the most startling and humorous change in his appearance is that his hair, which is usually shaggy and unkempt, has been combed and parted. He walks out into the middle of the street and looks around as Jin emerges from around the side of the shop and approaches him.)

Jin: Hey. Well, look at you. (She reaches up and messes his hair so it looks normal again.) You look so cute!
Zuko: It took my Uncle ten minutes to do my hair.

(Jin grabs Zuko by the arm and leads him off as he glances once back at the teashop. Cut to what appears to be town square of sorts where several people stand around doing various activities. The shot centers on the exterior of a patio restaurant. Cut to the Zuko and Jin who are eating at this place, Jin sipping on tea while Zuko pokes at his last meatball with his chop sticks, not looking at his date.)

Jin: So, how do you like the city so far?
Zuko: It's ok.
Jin: What do you like to do for fun?
Zuko: Nothing.
Waiter: (Walking over to address Zuko) Excuse me sir. Would you and your girlfriend care for dessert?
Zuko: (Shouting and pounding the table with his fist) She is not my girlfriend!

(The restaurant goes quiet as everyone glances over at him. The waiter walks away and Zuko laces his fingers and looks around at Jin who seems to have not taken any kind of offense or, indeed, any form of notice to this outburst and is devouring noodles from a bowl at an alarming rate. Zuko blinds once before speaking again to her.)

Zuko: (Trying to find something to say) You have... quite an appetite for a girl.
Jin: Um, thanks So, Lee, where were you and your Uncle living before you came here?
Zuko: Um, well, we've been traveling around for a long time.
Jin: Oh! Why were you traveling so much?
Zuko: We were uh, apart of this traveling circus.
Jin: Really? What did you do? Wait, lemme guess, you juggled!

(Zuko, arms folded, pauses for a moment before responding.)

Zuko: Yes. I juggled.
Jin: I've always wanted to learn how to juggle. Can you show me something?

(Jin holds out an assortment of objects apparently from the table that Zuko takes in his arms. He then throws each one up in the air, one after the other, and then prepares to catch them. He succeeds in catching none of them and one manages to fall onto his head and break into many pieces. Jin doesn't laugh, but smiles gently.)

Zuko: Whoah! I haven't practiced for awhile. (He wipes the shards of pottery from his hair.)
Jin: It's alright. Hey, I want to show you one of my favorite places in the city.

(Scene fades into a street somewhere in the city that is lit only by the light of the full moon and is deserted save for Zuko and Jin, the ladder leading the former by the hand.)

Jin: I'm so excited for you to see the firelight fountain. The lamps make the water sparkle and reflect in the pool in the most beautiful way.

(She leads Zuko into an open area with a large fountain and several posts with candles on top surrounding it in a circle; however, to spite its apparent name, it is dark and the candles unlit.)

Jin: I can't believe it! They aren't lit.

(Zuko looks at the disappointed Jin's face for a moment, then at the candles.)

Zuko: Close your eyes and don't peek.

(Zuko walks out into the circle of candles, holds his hands together, and closes his eyes as he prepares. A close-up of Zuko's face shows his eyes open and another shot shows him begin to firebend. Using his pointer and middle fingers on each hand, he shoots small bursts of flame in all directions at the candles to light them. Once finished, he stands straight and looks at Jin, still with her eyes closed.)

Zuko: Ok. Now you can look.
Jin: Oh wow... (Shot shows the whole area lit by the candles. Jin walks to Zuko looking around in amazement) What happened? How did they light? What did you...? (Zuko simply smiles at her.)

(They both turn to look at the fountain. As Zuko examines his work, Jin brushes her hand through her hair and smiles at him, though he doesn't see. She reaches over and grabs his hand to hold it. Having attracted his attention, Zuko turns to look at the girl smiling at him. They both turn to be face to face and as Jin begins to lean in for a kiss, Zuko quickly draws a piece of paper which he holds between their lips.)

Zuko: I brought you something. It's a coupon for a free cup of tea.
Jin: (Taking the coupon) Lee, this is so sweet.
Zuko: (He takes a few steps away from her.) Don't thank me. It was my Uncle's idea. He thinks you're our most valuable customer.
Jin: Your Uncle is a good teacher. I have something for you too. (She walks back to him and places her hand on his cheek.) Now it's your turn to close your eyes.

(He does so and Jin makes her move. The shot shows both of their lips as Jin delivers a short kiss and pulls back slightly. Zuko's lips move to hers to return the kiss and he begins to but the shot cuts to show him jumping back away from her. He stands for a second, looking at her, then turns his back and begins to walk away.)

Jin: What's wrong?
Zuko: It's complicated. I have to go.

(Zuko runs from the fountain leaving a confused Jin standing alone. The scene then cuts to Iroh who is leaning out of the window of his and his nephew's apartment, looking up and down the street apparently waiting on Zuko's return. Behind him, the door opens as Zuko enters without saying anything.)

Iroh: How was your night, Prince Zuko?

(Zuko walks across the floor and into what must be his room and slams the doors behind him without a word. Iroh looks after him for a second with a confused look on his face before turning back to the window to trim the flowerbed sitting there. Though, when the sound of the doors opening again is herd, he turns back around. Shot cuts to show Zuko's face in the crack between the two doors.)

Zuko: It was nice.

(He closes the door again as Iroh smiles pleasantly and returns to his flowers.)



The Tale of Momo
Written by: Justin Ridge and Giancarlo Volpe

(This dialog-free tale opens with a shot of a tree, similar to the giant one seen in The Swamp, towering high above the clouds. Suddenly, Appa flies up through the clouds and over to the tree. A new shot shows many fruits hanging from what appear to be vines on the tree. Appa hovers underneath these and Momo is seen perched upon the buffalo's head. Momo flies up and begins eating some fruit and tosses some down to Appa who chews them passively. As Momo continues to chew on one of the fruits, Appa suddenly gives a very great roar.

The screen flashes white and the shot cuts to Momo asleep on the windowsill of the Avatar's house. Startled by the thunder that woke him from his dream, Momo leaps up into Sokka's green Earth Kingdom bag that is hanging nearby. After a bit, he pokes his head up and realizes he has a bunch of white fur lying on his head that does not belong to him. After sniffing it a bit, the screen flashes white into a shot of Appa and Momo flying to indicate this is what Momo is thinking of at that second. With another roar of Appa's, the screen flashes white again and back to the real world as Momo chatters as he registers whom the fur belongs to.

The camera then pulls back to a shot from the lawn of the Avatar's house with Momo visible through the window. A shadow crosses the ground that looks very similar to Appa's shadow. Cut back to Momo as he wraps the wad of fur around one of his front legs and takes flight. He soars out the window of the house and into the yard to investigate if this shadow does indeed belong to his lost friend. But, alas, as he emerges from a tree he flew up into, he realizes that the shadow is merely being cast by a cloud. He holds his arm up and looks at the fur tied to it sadly, but then chatters a bit as he notices something new. Off in the distance, just on the other side of a roof, is what appears to be the top of the flying bison he is looking for. But when Momo flies closer, he finds out it was only a tree with white leaves and branches sticking out that looked similar to Appa's horns. Momo lands on one of these branches and his ears drop low in disappointment that he has once again failed to find his friend.

Fade into a shot of a street in the city as Momo soars down into it. He lands on a water barrel that has no lid and begins to drink from it. As he does, his wagging tail accidentally knocks over a stick sitting nearby. It falls to the ground with a loud thud that alerts three pygmy panthers who were rummaging in the garbage nearby. The panthers growl at Momo and suddenly pounce on him. Momo manages to dodge this in time and run into a box with an opening big enough for him but not enough for the panthers. The three predators surround the box and growl, two of them clawing in the openings to try and catch the lemur. Momo manages to slip out of an open crack in the back of the box and soar away. The panthers, however, are in hot pursuit. Chasing him by running on rooftops, one of them manages to swat him clean out of the air. After hitting the ground, Momo gets to his feet and runs on foot into a ground of people. The panthers do not follow their pray into the crowd.

Momo is then picked up by a man within this crowd and has a green little hat stringed to his head. He's tossed into an opening in the circle of the people where two monkeys are already dancing to the beat of a drummer in the background. After standing for a moment, Momo dances along too in a very strange and silly dance as a faster, livelier version of his theme music plays. The crowd all cheer and clap for the dance, but the panthers are stalking just outside the perimeter of people, looking in between the legs at their prey. One of the monkeys jumps onto Momo's head and balances with its hand, the other then doing the same on his head, and Momo struggles to keep balance.

The panthers growl and finally make their move, all of them leaping into the circle with a roar. Momo flees again, but this time as he tries to fly away, one of them grabs him round the middle and is taken for the ride, which slows him down in the flight. The other two panthers jump on and all four creatures crash into the ground. When the dust clears, Momo is seen pinned to the ground by one of his pursuers while the other two stand ready to strike their catch. However, before they can, a net flies in, captures all four of them, and drags them off.

A new shot shows an animal catcher placing Momo into a cage and locking it by placing a peg in to prevent the doors from opening. As the cart begins to move away, Momo rubs the clump of Appa fur still tied to his arm against his face possibly fearing he'll never see his friend again. Fade into a scene at what appears to be some sort of butcher, the cart as been pulled up next to the building. A view from Momo's perspective in the cage shows the animal catcher and the butcher arguing, though since this is from Momo's standpoint, the dialog is herd as gibberish. Another shot shows that occupying the cage next to him are the three pygmy panther scratching at their cage and crying out. Momo utilizes his opposable thumbs by reaching through the bars and removing the peg that holds his cage shut. As he pushes the cage open and begins to run away, he stops and looks back. The pygmy panthers are all staring at him sadly from their cage, realizing their fate rests with him. Momo leaps back onto the cart and begins to remove the peg to free them, just as the two men begin to approach. But when the men reach the cart, they find both cages deserted as right behind them, Momo and the panthers make their escape on the rooftops.

Fade into a scene on the roofs of the city, as Momo and his three new friends sit and watch the clouds. One of the panthers is rubbing up against Momo in a loving fashion; all three apparently very aware and very grateful for what Momo just did for them. Suddenly, one of the panthers uses its mouth to remove the wad of Appa's fur from Momo's arm. The panther with the fur then runs off and Momo, chattering loudly, follows as well as the other two panthers. The panthers lead Momo through the streets of Ba Sing Se till finally one of them places the wad of fur down inside a hole in the ground. Momo lands in the hole as the panther runs off. He looks at this strange hole and realizes immediately that it is actually a footprint made by none other than the Appa, the very bison Momo has been desperately trying to find. Chattering softly, Momo lays down on the ground holding the wad of fur. The camera pulls back to show the panthers sitting nearby watching as the rain begins to fall on Momo, lying in the only signature of his long lost friend. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence includes clips from "The Serpent's Pass", "The Desert", "City of Walls and Secrets".]



Act I

Four weeks ago (The scene opens to a flashback of the open desert, as Wan Shi Tong's library sinks into the sands. In a closer shot, we see Toph struggling to prevent the tower from submerging entirely.)

Toph: (straining) No, stop sinking!

(Cuts to Appa, surrounded by sandbenders who have him ensnared with a number of ropes. The cowled desert nomads are desperately holding on to the ropes in an attempt to control a snarling Appa. With a powerful toss of his head, Appa sends one of his assailants flying over his head to tumble into the sand. Two more of the Sandbenders narrowly avoid being crushed by the bison's powerful tail slap. Appa sends yet another nomad flying overhead, and strains mightily against the ropes of the remaining attackers. The view pans over to show Toph , hands pressed against the tower in an attempt to halt its descent with earthbending.)

Toph: Don't make me put this down!

(Turning from the tower, she tries to launch an earthbending attack at the sandbenders, but it misses them harmlessly. Behind her, the building containing her friends begins to sink rapidly, and Toph quickly turns and braces against it, straining her powers to slow its descent. Behind her, the sandbenders continue struggling with the sky-bison.)

Gashuin: Put a muzzle on him!

(One of the raiders loops a rope around Appa's jaws, which he promptly snaps. Appa lunges forward at him, and he falls backward to avoid the bison's massive jaws. Another rope, weighted with a pouch of sand, loops over Appa's right horn, and all of the raiders pull downward in an attempt to subdue him. A powerful head butt sends one of the sandbenders hurtling into the air, and Appa launches himself skyward. Yet another nomad snares one of the sky-bison's legs, and he uses sandbending to anchor himself into the sand. Even as this bender is drug forward, a further rope is looped around another leg, until Appa, hovering above the heads of the anchored nomads, is finally brought crashing down to the ground. From above we see eight of the sandbenders holding a splayed Appa against the ground with ropes, while a sand-skiff glides close. Two of the vessels, propelled by sandbenders, begin dragging the subdued bison away from the library tower. We cut to a shot of Toph, still holding the tower.)

Toph: I'm sorry Appa. (she is grief-stricken, and closes her eyes sorrowfully)

(Behind her, we see Appa growing distant, and cut to a shot of him closing wearing a look of mournful resignation. Cut to a shot of the sun shining above the desert sands, as the sand-skiffs slide by, hauling Appa behind them. The young leader of the sandbender lowers his facemask, and signals for the three skiffs to come to a halt in an open stretch of desert.)

Gashuin: (dropping to the ground) Ransack his saddle. Who knows what treasures are stashed in there? (two nomads rush towards the bound Appa)

(Appa roars menacingly, and the two nomads stop short of him looking back to their leader)

Gashuin: He's tied up good, he can't hurt you.

(The two sandbenders leap up onto Appa's saddle, kicking up a cloud of dust in his face that causes him to snuffle and let loose a tremendous sneeze.

The blast of air impacts against the center skiff, sending it rocketing through the air to wreck against a sand dune.)

Sandbender: (turning to Gashuin) What's your father going to do when he finds out we lost a sand sailor?
Gashuin: Nothing. (thumbs back to the wreck) It's the one we stole from the Hammi tribe. (turns back to Appa) Did you empty the saddle? (walks up to the pile of gear) That's it! Nothing but garbage! (Frustrated, he kicks away a pair of items) Ahh! It doesn't matter. We'll still make a profit from selling him to those beetle-headed merchants! (his companion picks up a parasol and opens it up, shading himself)

(The scene fades into a shot of the remaining two skiffs dragging Appa to a trio of large tents grouped out in the open desert. He is drug into the camp past a group of three well dressed men. Once the skiffs stop, the men walk around to the front of Appa stopping to his head to appraise him.)

First Beetle Merchant: How's his temper?
Gashuin: Uhhhh, pretty good.

(Appa abruptly roars ferociously, causing the merchants to jump back in fear, then falls silent again)

Gashuin: (sheepishly) Uh, most of the time.
Second Beetle Merchant: (turning to the first merchant) I bet someone will pay a fortune for him in Ba Sing Se.
First Beetle Merchant: All right. You've got a deal.

(Gashuin, flanked by two of his fellows, accepts a small ornate chest. He opens it and looks into it smiling before closing it and walking away. Cut to a giant green stag beetle ridden by one of the camp followers. It strains at a series of lines attached to its saddle, and drags a bound Appa onto a large sled. Six wooden arms lever over from the sides of the sled, caging the bison. A final shot shows the beetle harnessed to the sled, as the merchants look on.

Cut to an aerial scene showing Aang riding his glider low across the waves of sand.)

Aang: (shouting) Appa! Appa!

(A close-up of Aang's angry face, as he begins to blow furiously on the bison whistle. We cut to a shot of Appa's face as his eyes snap open upon hearing the ultrasonic note. We see the stag beetle, the array of ropes and a pair of merchants from Appa's point-of-view. Appa starts moaning and struggling, rocking the entire sled back and forth. A view of the Sandbender skiffs shows them preparing to depart.)

Gashuin: (calling back) He's your problem now. Ha ha ha! (the two skiffs slide away into the distance)
Second Beetle Merchant: What!?

(He and a fellow merchant turn back to the sled, which is now rocking side to side dangerously. Appa's tail breaks the rope holding it down, and with a powerful tail slap he launches himself, sled and all, into the air and over the stag beetle. He fillips over the beetle, and begins dragging it through the camp, destroying a tent in the process.)

First Beetle Merchant: (shouting) We need the shirshu spit darts!
Second Beetle Merchant: (whips out a blowgun) Got'em! Ok big fella, you're gonna take a nice little snoozle. (he loads the blowgun and brings it to his lips as he says this)

(He fires the blowgun up at Appa, piercing his foot with three small blowgun needles. Instantly, Appa's eyes begin to droop, and he comes to a sliding crash back onto the desert floor.

Cut to Aang, swooping down to a landing upon a sand dune.)

Aang: (yelling) Appa! (he looks out over a seemingly endless expanse of empty desert, lowers his face sadly) No... NOOOO!

(With this final cry of outrage, Aang leaps forward and sends an incredible blast of air down into the desert sand. Viewed from afar, we see a towering mushroom cloud of sand and dust explode into the sky. Switching again to Appa's point-of-view, we can see the cloud far, far in the distance. The two merchants step into view as the groaning bison's vision begins to blur and darken.)

First Beetle Merchant: We've gotta get rid of this one! He's too much trouble.
Second Beetle Merchant: We could sell him for parts.

(Fade to black. After a moment, we begin to hear a new voice in the darkness. Appa's vision begins to recover, and we see through his eyes the bars of a cage, with a man in fire nation garb regarding him from the other
side with arms crossed.)

Circus Trainer: (softly) Oh. I understand you've had a rather hard time lately. That's too bad. You probably felt you had no choice but to behave outrageously. Like a wild animal. (walks up and strokes Appa's forehead through the bars) But don't worry, you won't anymore. (in a sinister voice) Because I am going to break you.

(From above, we see that Appa is enclosed in a circus wagon, and a number of other creatures lie in cages nearby. From the outside, pennants wave in the wind on the enormous red tent of the Fire nation circus.

Returning to the inside of the animal tent, we see the Trainer pushing a cart of cabbages past a reclining platypus-bear. He tosses one of the cabbages back to the bear, who catches it in his bill and munches on it. He pushes it past Appa's cage, and the bison rises slowly, his attention on the cart. As he gains his feet, he finds that he has been chained and manacled. Rumbling with displeasure, he begins gnawing at the manacle on his forepaw. The Trainer walks past to the cage containing a vulture-griffon, who cries out in anticipation. As he feeds the beast, he turns to address Appa, who is watching him and drooling.

Circus Trainers: Hungry? Don't worry, I'm going to feed you too. (holds cabbage out to Appa) But not yet. First I am going to show you how you'll earn it.

(He pulls the cabbage back away from Appa's outstretched tongue, walks back to the Vulture-Griffon and feeds it the cabbage. He opens it's cage, and the griffon flies out and up hovers overhead. Summoning a whip of fire, the Trainer cracks it at the griffon then rushes forward to guide its performance. As he steps away, Appa uses his air bending skills and sucks in a stream of air that pulls the cart full of cabbages closer to him. He successfully lifts one from the pile and devours it. We see the vulture-griffon performing aerial acrobatics involving a series of hoops, tossing one to the Trainer.)

Circus Trainer: Or course, when you perform, the hoops will be flaming. (Appa vacuums another cabbage) And if you are careful, you won't get burned.

(Appa releases an loud belch from behind him)

Circus Trainer: (wheeling around angrily) You're about to be sorry.

(Summoning his fire whip, the Trainer creates a blaze in front of Appa's cage. Appa rears back and groans and roars in distress. The Trainer approaches his cage, heedless of the flames between them.)

Circus Trainer: It's obvious that whoever your previous owner was, he had no idea how to handle you properly. (Appa ,cowed by the flames, glares at the Trainer)

(Cut to the outside of the Main Circus Tent. Lit against the nighttime sky, a large crowd has gathered outside the entrance. Circus style music can be heard playing. We cut to a fire nation boy about Aang's age, who walks past an open tent flap. He quickly reappears, eyes wide in amazement. He sees the caged Appa inside the tent, trying to pull a bale of hay towards himself with his wind breath. His attempts to bring it to him come to nothing. Turning, Appa exchanges looks with the amazed lad, and makes a licking gesture with his tongue. The boy smiles, and seem ready to enter, when a hulking adult shows up behind him abruptly.)

Fire Nation Man: I am gonna get a bag of sizzle-crisps. (points commandingly) Stay here and stay away from that monster. Behave yourself, or you'll regret it.

(The boy watches him walk off with a meek look, then turns back to the tent opening. Rushing inside, he starts rolling the bale toward Appa, who gives him a friendly lick before chowing down on the hay bail. Hearing someone approaching, the boy quickly dashes back outside.)

Circus Trainer: (approaching from the other direction) He's a difficult creature, stubborn and willful. I need more time with him. It's too risky right now. (he and the ringmaster step fully into view)
Ring Master: (angrily) Too Risky? What are you talking about? (gestures dramatically) This is the circus, home of fear and danger. I want the Wind Buffalo to perform tonight. (he stalks off-scene)
Circus Trainer: (turns to glare at Appa) If you don't behave yourself, you'll regret it.

(Stepping forward, he creates a large torch of flame before Appa's face, who shrinks back in his cage and growls in fear and anger. He stomps off, and we see that the small boy has watched the entire scene from the edge of the tent flap. He looks sad, then exchanges another friendly look with Appa. The large man comes up behind him and starts guiding him away.)

Fire Nation Man: Let's go!
Fire Nation Boy: (waving) See ya later buddy.

(As the boy's waving hand disappears, Appa turns and settles down in his cage with a deep sorrowful sigh. A quick cut to the outside of the Main Tent, then inside where we find the circus underway. Two women are spinning plates on top of long sticks, two platypus-bears in costume balance on large balls, and a group of men stand three high in a pyramid. We see the cheering crowd, seated on bleachers. The young boy from earlier reaches for a sizzle-crisp, but the man snatches them away selfishly.)

Ring Master: (voice-over) Ladies and gentleman, now for something truly special. (we cut to him as he creates a pair of flames from his palms) A noble beast so magnificent and rare, it hasn't been seen by human eyes in generations. (gesturing, he creates a fiery flash to his left) I give you the Wind Buffalo!

(We pan to a curtain, which drops to reveal a rather dejected looking Appa, looking ridiculous in an outlandish circus get-up, his face painted in clown fashion. Appa paws unhappily at his fake beard. The crowd begins laughing as the young boy looks on unhappily. Appa enters the center ring, where he is joined by the Circus Trainer.)

Circus Trainer: Up.

(Appa shakes his head and turnscompletely around, to the crowds amusement)

Circus Trainer: (looks back from crowd angrily) Up, you insolent cow!

(He creates a fire whip and cracks it at Appa, who roars at him in defiance. In the audience, the boy jumps up from his seat.)

Fire Nation Boy: (shouting and gesturing) Run away! Get away from him. (the large man pulls him back into his seat)

(The Circus trainer, whip ablaze, coaxes Appa into rising upward to the amazement of the crowd. The spectators clap and cheer as the small boy looks heartbroken. We see Appa begin a series of aerial acrobatics through flaming hoops. His costume catches fire as he passes through the second hoop, and he tail-slaps the third one, sending it hurtling to smash into the Circus trainer.)

Circus Trainer: Augh! Oof. (he crashes senseless to the ground)

(In another Appa point-of-view shot, we see the assembled crowd laughing in the bleachers. Appa focuses in on the young boy, and we flash back to a similar sepia-toned scene of Aang laughing in a similar pose. Appa, growling in frustration, begins shaking off his beard as the crowd continues to laugh merrily.)

Fire Nation Boy: Go. You can do it.

(Appa starts to rise into the air, only to be intercepted by a blast of fire from below that sends him in the other direction.)

Circus Trainer: (furious) Get back here, you stupid beast!

(The Trainer, now recovered, again creates his fire whip as Appa swoops down at him. He cracks it just as Appa strikes him with an upward tail lash, sending him hurtling up and out though the roof of the tent, sailing in a high arc. Appa crashes through an opening in the tent's roof, shedding the rest of his costume as he does so. The smiling young boy looks upward at the dangling remains of the freed bison's costume. Appa soars away into the night, the lights of the circus fading away below him.)



Act II

(The scene opens to Appa soaring above the desert in the early dawn, as he comes upon the crater left by the disappearing Library. We flash back to his remembrance of the tower, and he lands in the crater and starts pawing at the sand. With a great bellow of despair he collapses onto his belly in the center of the crater. Cuts again to the shackled bison flying above the desert floor, his stomachs rumbling with hunger. Spying a large egg lying on the desert floor, Appa lands heavily next to it. But just before he can lap up the egg with his tongue a small bipedal lizard rushes up, snatches it and flees into the rocks with the egg held high. Appa spots a Jackelope standing next to a small cactus in the distance, and swoops over, frightening off the small creature. He bites off the entire cactus, then spits it out, roaring in pain and wagging his hurt tongue. We cut again to a tired looking Appa flying low over the midday desert, and he suddenly begins sniffing the air with interest.

He flies toward a large stone mesa, and descends into one of the many openings in the gigantic mud hive built atop it. Moments later, Appa zooms back out, hotly pursued by an angry swarm of buzzard-wasps. Wheeling about in the air, he sends them crashing to the desert floor with a great wind-gust sweep of his tail. Stunned, the buzzard-wasps rise and fly slowly back to their hive. Gasping and panting, Appa lands dripping of honey. Rolling onto his side, he hungrily laps the honey from his fur, collapsing with a satisfied, exhausted sigh. Cut to sunset, as Appa flies over greener, less desolate lands. Looking tired and bedraggled, he flies in to land on a farm, entering a large domed barn. He devours a pile of hay, then flops down and immediately lapses into a deep slumber.

A Sepia-tone dream sequence shows us the Eastern Air Temple built high upon three mist shrouded peaks. We see an adorable Air bison calf swoop into view, joined by four others and an adult bison. The cooing calves fly in a circle around the adult, then pause to nuzzle it before flying downward, the adult in tow. Below, a group of small boys in airbender garb, take apples from a large bowl held by an airbender nun. We see that one of them is a young Aang, at age 6 or so.)

Air Nomad Woman: Chose well. A sky bison is a companion for life.

(The bison land on the terrace in front of the boys, and Aang approaches what is certainly a young Appa. Aang holds out the apple, which the calf sniffs before opening his mouth and letting Aang toss it in. Young Aang spreads his arms affectionately over the calf's head, who responds by knocking him to the ground and licking his face affectionately.)

Aang: (lying on his back) Ugh! I guess this mean we'll always be together. (he laughs as the calf begins licking him again)

(The scene changes to the night camp upon the Serpent's Pass, where a dreaming Aang mimics the scene we just observed laughing as the dream calf licks him. Aang rolls to his side upon his bedroll with a blissful look on his face.)

Aang: (smiling in his sleep) Always.

(Cut back to Appa, slumbering inside the barn. He is roused by a human cry of terror.)

Farmer: AAhhh! It's some kind of monster!

(From Appa's point of view we see a wide-eyed Earth peasant waving a pitchfork in his face. Appa rises angrily to his feet, his manacles rattling, and growls a warning to the farmer. The farmer's wife comes to the barn entrance, carrying a bright torch. Seeing the blazing torch, Appa rears onto his hind legs in panic, sending the couple running and screaming. In a full panic Appa crashes up through the roof of the barn, sending up a rush of wind that extinguishes the torch carried by the couple, who lie sprawled in the dirt.

Cut to a scene of Appa flying over the Serpent's Pass, passing in the pre-dawn air over an Earth Kingdom vessel. From the deck, a shocked Iroh watches the forlorn bison pass overhead and away.)

Iroh: Huh!
Zuko: (roused from sleep) Uncle? What are you looking at? Is there something out there?
Iroh: (nervously) Uh, it's nothing. Go back to sleep. (he sighs in relief as Zuko falls asleep again)

(Appa descends towards forested bluffs, and crashes groggily near a tree-capped mine entrance. He begins to nibble some grass, before being roused by a loud squealing echoing from the mine entrance. He turns just as an enraged porcupine-boar charges out of the mine, crashing into him and sending them both rolling down the hillside. Both of them crash to a halt below, and we see that Appa already has a number of large quills sticking out from his side. Appa and his opponent both roar a challenge, and they begin to circle one another. Suddenly the porcupine-boar charges Appa's flank, plowing the bison into a tree that snaps in two from the impact. Seizing the tree in his mouth, Appa tosses it at the boar driving him backwards into a line of trees. Squealing in rage, the porcupine boar leaps over the tree, charging headlong towards the sky-bison.

Rearing onto his hind legs, Appa catches the charging boar and hurls him deep into the forest, where the beast finally loses heart and flees into the night. Panting heavily from exertion, Appa plucks one of the quills from his hide with his teeth, the ground trembling from his roar of agony. He half flies half stumbles up the hill to the mine entrance, and collapses inside, utterly spent.

Cut to the following morning, where Appa lies unconscious inside the mine. The day passes again into night, as it begins to rains steadily outside.

Another morning, and we see the Kyoshi warriors gathering red berries from a group of bushes. One of the warriors notices clumps of white fur hanging from the branches of a bush.)

Kyoshi Warrior: (plucking a mass of fur) Must have been some fight.
Suki: Wait. Let me see that. (takes the clump of fur) No. It couldn't be.

(We follow her gaze up the side of the hill, a devastated scene of broken trees and stripped earth. She follows the path of destruction, climbing up the bluff and finally pulling herself up to the top. She discovers the ragged bison lying in the shadow of the mine entrance.)

Suki: Huh? Appa? Oh no.

(Roused by her voice, Appa cowers back into the mine growling. As Suki approaches, she sees his chains as well as the various injuries he has sustained. Kneeling near the entrance she lays down a double handful of berries and fruit.)

Suki: (reassuringly) It's gonna be ok Appa. I have to leave, but I am gonna be back soon with help.

(She turns and hurries back down the bluff. Appa emerges and cautiously sniffs at the fruit. Later we see Suki leading the other Kyoshi warriors carefully up the side of the bluff, as Appa lies back inside the mine entrance.)

Suki: (addressing the others) No sudden movements. He's been lost for awhile, and he looks like he's hurt. He's shy around people and scared. Stay low, and stay quiet.
Kyoshi Warrior: I can't believe you found the Avatar's bison. Didn't you just see the Avatar a few days ago?
Suki: Yes, so he can't be too far from here. It's our responsibility to get Appa back to him safely. This could be our most important mission yet.

(Turning, she leads the other girls up the rest of the way, pausing at the top of the hill. Appa notices them, and rises to his feet roaring an angry warning.)

Suki: Give him some space! (they back up apace, as Suki edges closer) Appa, it's me, Suki. I'm a friend. (walks toward Appa,who moans warily) I want to help you. You're hurt. We can help you feel better. And we can help you find Aang. (she cautiously places her hand on his nose, and he lays down and closes his eyes in acceptance)

(Cut to a scene showing the manacles and quills lying in the grass, while further off, a better-better looking Appa sits among the girl warriors licking the face of one with his great tongue. Suddenly his ears twitch to approaching danger, and as he turns about, a bolt of blue lightning fells a nearby tree. Azula, Mai and Ty Lee ride out of the hills on the backs of mongoose dragons, reigning to a halt before the Kyoshi warriors.)

Azula: (holding out a clump of white fur) My, my, you're easy to find. (tosses it aside) It's really astounding my brother hasn't captured you yet.

(The Kyoshi warriors stand ready around Appa, as the three regard them from the saddles of their mounts. Scene goes to black.)



Act III

(We return to the preceding scene, as Appa rears and growls threateningly. The warriors drop as one into combat stances, unfurling war fans and collapsible shields.)

Suki: What do you want with us?
Azula: (mockingly) Who are you, the Avatar's fan girls?
Ty Lee: (thinks for a moment, then brightens) Oh, I get it! I get it. Good one, Azula!
Suki: If you are looking for the Avatar, you're out of luck.
Mai: (sighs despondently) I knew this was a waste of time.
Azula: No Avatar huh? (shrugs) Well that's ok, any friend of the Avatar, is an enemy of mine.

(As she finishes saying this, Azula does a spinning aleap from her saddle, sending a blast of blue fire towards the warriors. They leap to form a shield wall in front of Appa, deflecting the fire blast. Mai and Ty Lee flip forward out of their saddles to engage the warriors in combat. Mai, landing on her feet, produces a brace of throwing knives from her sleeve. With a sweeping throw, she pins a startled warrior to a tree by her clothing.)

Mai: You're so colorful, it's making me nauseous.

(Mai spins and throws a barrage of throwing-arrows at a second warrior, who draws a katana and cuts them from the air. She takes a couple of swings at Ty Lee, who nimbly evades her slashes before felling her with a flurry of pressure-point strikes.)

Ty Lee: (hands on hips) You're not prettier than we are!

(Suki continues to stand between Azula and Appa, blocking her fire blasts with her shield. Azula's second more powerful blast ricochets off Suki's shield, setting fire to the tree she had felled initially. As it catches on fire, Appa cowers back from the leaping flames.)

Azula: Afraid of fire I see. That's good, you should be!
Suki: (drawing her sword) Go Appa! Fly away from here! Get out of here.

(As Appa rises to the sky, Suki charges Azula. The Fire princess performs an amazing horizontal mid-air spin, simultaneously avoiding her thrust and sending her sword flying from her hands to imbed in a tree. Suki blocks another fire blast, then Azula counters her kick and trips Suki to the ground. Pausing at the sight of Suki in danger, Appa turns and flies back to help. Ready to finish Suki, Azula dodges beneath a pair of hurled war-fans hurled at her back, and turns to launch a retaliatory attack. Suki rises to her feet, rushing to wave off the approaching sky-bison)

Suki: (waving a burning branch) Get out of here! You have to find Aang! We'll be ok!

(Clearly torn, Appa finally shies away and flies off into the sky. Smiling in relief, Suki barely reacts in time to block a blast of blue fire with her shield. Staggered backwards, she falls into a battle-stance, unfolding her war fan.)

Azula: (contemptuously) Don't you know that fans just make flames stronger?

(The two charge one another, and as they clash the scene action freezes and the scene closes. Cut to Appa above the forest, then flying along a river among a flock of white birds. We see Appa flying through dark skies in a torrential downpour, passing above a pair of Southern Water tribe ships sailing through the rains. On the deck of one of the vessels, we see Hakoda staring up at the sky-bison in wonder. Cut again to Appa flying steadily over misty peaks, until in the distance we recognize the ruins of the Eastern Air Temple Appa enters the broken, weedy ruins of the Sky-Bison stables, and in flashback we see it restored, with young bison calves frolicking through its warm hay covered halls.

Resuming his journey through the stables, Appa comes across a round metal framework, and once more in flashback we see bison calves teething at it the bars. Back in the present, Appa chomps on the ring, but the dust causes him to cough and he leaves it unsatisfied. Crossing one of the spans between the peaks Appa passes through and steps out onto a terrace. Framed against the rising sun is a bald figure sitting cross-legged at the end of the terrace. Mistaking him for Aang, he bounds forward and knocks the figure on his back, licking his face with gusto. We see that it is not Aang, however, but a bald, brown skinned old man with a long snowy beard and bushy eyebrows. The old man blinks in surprise at the sky-bison standing over him, before recovering to speak in a thick East Indian accent.)

Guru: Hello. I am Guru Pathik.

(realizing it's not Aang, Appa jumps away and turns to stare him down)

Guru: (leaning up) I know I am not the person you expected. And I didn't expect to be licked by a giant tongue just now. The world is full of surprises.

(Appa gives him a long menacing growl, and the old man calmly lies back down on his back closing his eyes. Later in the day, the guru raises his head to look at the waiting bison, who growls at him, causing him to lower his head and close his eyes again. Still later peeks open an eye to peer at Appa, who again issues a low growl. Once again the guru calmly closes his eyes. Night falls, and we see Appa lying on his side, snoring loudly. Opening his eyes, the lean old man nimbly rolls backwards to his feet, stands and dusts his hands in satisfaction. Rubbing his hands together he walks up to the chest of the slumbering Appa. He touches Appa's neck with two fingers, then places his hand on the bison's leathery chest plate.)

Guru: Oh, dear. You've been through so much recently. Hurt and betrayed, so twisted up inside. (he runs two fingers along Appa's underside, then places a hand on his belly) You're still full of love. (sighs) But fear has moved in where trust should be. (we pan upward to show the temple, as continues in voice-over) I've been expecting you and the young Avatar for quite a long time. I had a vision many years ago of helping him. That's why I came to the Eastern Air Temple (standing near the restless Appa's head) Ahh. Your emotions are so turbulent. Like swirling storm clouds.. (places a hand on Appa's brow) Let the clouds in your mind be gentle, peaceful ones. (as he says this Appa calms into a deep pleasant sleep)

(Appa's eyes snap open, revealing another night has passed, and he rises looking around surprised. He notices a small pile of fruit before him, and eagerly snaps it up. Turning he notices another piece of fruit, and still another, until he is eating his way back into the temple behind him. We cut to a peak reached by a stair curving around its side. The Eastern Air Temple is framed just behind it. On its top is centered a stone dais, surrounded by a rock garden and a copse of trees. Appa follows the stairs up to the base of the platform. We see Guru, sitting in a meditative pose with a bird perched on his head, surrounded by birds and small woodland creatures. he holds out a handful of seeds, and another bird lands on it.)

Guru: Someone looks very well-rested, judging by your bed head. (Appa lows at him in greeting, and shakes his fur back into place)

(Cut to a full moon-lit sky, and pans to the stone dais, where Guru sits in deep meditation, while Appa paces behind him, before finally lying next to him. The Guru then opens his eyes and turns to pat Appa's belly, gathering up a rolled and tied parchment and rising to his feet.)

Guru: I have prepared a message for Aang. May I attach it to your horn? (Appa seems to assent, and secures the message to a horn, then, standing before Appa) You and the Avatar's energies are mixed. You have an unbreakable bond. By reading your energy, (touches Appa's forehead) I can sense where Aang is. (Appa licks his face with his great tongue) Funny, what invisible strings connect us all.

(Placing his hand on Appa's brow, he closes his eyes and both seem to focus. intently. From a distance we see a pale light emit from them both, and a path of light snakes away down the side of the peak).

Guru: (speaking in voice-over, as the light focuses on Appa's head) I will see you again, great beast.

(Cut to Appa soaring down toward the city of Ba Sing Se. Silhouetted by the full moon, he passes over the inner wall, over the rooftops below. He is watched from the peak of a roof by a pair of Dai Li agents, who slide down after he passes. Appa hovers over the city, looking about for signs of Aang. Suddenly his eyes snap wide in excitement as he hears the familiar sound of the bison whistle. He descends rapidly, landing in an open square in the city's lower circle and bounding down a street.

Cut to show the bison whistle, lying unused next to a sleeping Aang and Momo. Somewhere in the city, a figure stands in the shadows blowing another whistle. As Appa turns a corner he man steps out into the light, revealing himself as Long Feng. He walks forward, lowering the whistle. Appa retreats back, leaving the footprint in the mud that is seen in the previous episode. With an earthbending gesture, Long Feng causes the entire street section to revolve like a trap door, dropping Appa into a passage beneath the city.

As the dust settles and the camera fades back, we are left with a final view of the footprint, the last trace of Appa to be seen.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence includes clips from "Jet", "City of Walls and Secrets", "Appa's Lost Days".]



Act I

(The Scene opens on the house in the upper ring the heroes have been using in Ba Sing Se. It shifts inside, to show a series of childishly drawn pictures of Appa lying on the floor. We see Sokka lying on his stomach, working intently on yet another sketch. A more distant shot shows Toph reclining on the floor nearby, while Momo licks her foot. Katara and Aang rush in through the front door.)

Katara: We found a printer to make our posters. (holds up a poster with an expert rendition of Appa, picture of Aang, and dense script, while Aang smiles and points to it)
Sokka: Hey, I thought designing "the lost Appa poster" was my job. I've been working all day on my Appa. (holds up a crude drawing with a proud smile)
Aang: (perplexed) Sokka, the arrow is on Appa's head. (Katara struggles to contain her laughter)
Sokka: (pointing to the sketch) This IS his head.
Katara: (taking it to study up close) Why are feet coming out of it?
Sokka: (snatching the sketch back indignantly) Those are his horns! (hangs his head) I haven't seen him awhile ok?!
Toph: (ironically) It looks just like him to me.
Sokka: (flattered) Thank you, I worked really... (realization sets in) Why do you feel the need to do that?
Katara: Let's just stick with the professional version.
Sokka: Grrrr! (violently rips the drawing to tiny shreds)
Aang: (enthusiastically) Come on, let's get busy! (holds up two stacks of leaflets)

(Cut to show Aang and Momo soaring at rooftop level over Ba Sing Se, dropping a stream of leaflets behind them into the city streets. We are then shown the tiny Tea Shop wherein Iroh and Zuko have been working. Inside Iroh is pouring tea for a wealthily dressed man and his bodyguards. As Iroh walks away, they sip the tea and smile, then rise to approach him.)

Quon: So you're the genius behind this incredible brew. The whole city is buzzing about you. (holds up the teacup in a hand glittering with jeweled rings) I hope Pao pays you well.
Iroh: (smiling) Good tea is its own reward.
Quon: But it doesn't have to be the only reward. How would you like to have your own tea shop?
Iroh: (stunned) My own tea shop? This is a dream come true.
Pao: (scampering to join conversation) What's going on here? Are you trying to poach my tea maker? (throws himself protectively between Iroh and Quon)
Quon: Sorry Pao, that's business for you, am I right?
Pao: (increasingly desperate) Mushie, if you stay, I will make you Assistant Manager. Wait, Senior Assistant manager.
Quon: I'll provide you with a new apartment in the upper ring. The Tea shop is yours to do whatever you want. (Zuko glances over from busing a table) Complete creative freedom.
Iroh: (elated) I even get to name the shop?
Quon: Of course!
Pao: (pleading) Uh, Senior Executive Assistant Manager?

(Iroh sets the teapot into the hands of shop owner Pao, who grimaces in pain. Pao walks off as Iroh and Quon exchange respectful bows. Zuko crosses in the foreground, pausing as Iroh speaks to him.)

Iroh: (excitedly) Did you hear nephew? This man wants to give us our own tea shop in the upper ring of the city.
Quon: That's right young man. Your life is about to change for the better.

(Zuko continues to walk away towards the front door, setting down the tray of cups)

Zuko: (gravely) I'll try to contain my joy. (steps outside)

(Closing the door behind him, Zuko steps out to lean against the front of the teashop. One of the Appa leaflets flutters out of the sky, Zuko catches it out of the air and reads it. Realizing the import of it, he begins scanning the sky for the source of the paper. He climbs to the roof of the shop just as another scattering of them settle to the street. Looking at the leaflet once more, his face becomes set with determination.

Cut to the interior of the upper ring house, where Katara and Sokka are playing a card game on a wooden table. Toph lies on her back nearby, bouncing a small ball off of a wall. Aang and Momo burst though the front door. Both approach the table.)

Aang: I just finished dropping all the leaflets. Has anyone come in with news about Appa?
Katara: (studying her cards) It's only been a day, just be patient.

(Aang settles to rest his chin on the table dejectedly. A moment later there is a rapping on the front door.)

Aang: (popping up eagerly) Wow, you're right! Patience really pays off. (rushes to open the door) Joo Dee?!
Joo Dee: (with usual eerie grin and careful speech) Hello, Aang and Katara and Sokka and Toph. (the other three gather to talk to her)
Sokka: What happened to you? Did the Dai Li throw you in jail?
Joo Dee: (dismissively) What, jail? Of course not. The Dai Li are the protectors of our cultural heritage.
Toph: But you disappeared at the Earth King's party.
Joo Dee: Oh, I simply took a short vacation to Lake Laogai, out in the country. It was quite relaxing. (Sokka's face shows clear suspicion)
Katara: But then they replaced you with some other woman who also said her name was Joo Dee.
Joo Dee: I'm Joo Dee.
Aang: Why are you here?
Joo Dee: (pulling out leaflet) Dropping flyers and putting up posters isn't permitted within the city. Not without proper clearance.
Sokka: (annoyed) We can't wait around to get permission for everything.
Joo Dee: (cheerfully grinning) You are absolutely forbidden by the rules of the city to continue putting up posters.
Aang: (red faced and steaming with frustration, shouting) WE DON'T CARE ABOUT THE RULES, AND WE'RE NOT ASKING PERMISSON!! (flails his arms in outrage, starts backing an alarmed Joo Dee out the front door) We're finding Appa on our own and you should just stay out of our way! (slams door shut)
Sokka: (thoughtfully) That might come back to bite us in the blubber.
Aang: (glaring at the door) I don't care. From now on we do whatever it takes to find Appa.
Toph: (raising arms in the air) YEAH! Let's break some rules!

(Toph turns and blasts out the nearest wall with earthbending.

Cut to the outside. As the dust clears from the destroyed wall, the heroes leave out the front door. Panning back, we see a pair of Dai Li agents watching from atop a roof across the street. They lie on their stomachs, peering down over the peak of the tile rooftop, then slip away.

Shift to the exterior of the Dai Li headquarters, then to the fire lit interior of Long Feng's private audience chamber. Feng sits on a small chair, while Joo Dee kneels before him.)

Long Feng: (calmly) I am very disappointed in your work with the Avatar and his friends, Joo Dee. I had hoped that you would be able to control this situation.
Joo Dee: (distressed) I'm so sorry, but they don't trust me anymore. I don't think I can keep working like this. (covers her mouth, terribly upset)
Long Feng: (softly) Joo Dee, the Earth King has invited you to Lake Laogai. (she looks up, and her pupils dilate)
Joo Dee: (calmly) I am honored to accept his invitation.
Long Feng: (nods) Good. Now go await further orders.

(she rises and exits past two Dai Li)

Long Feng: (rising and pacing) If the Avatar keeps searching for his bison, it could upset the delicate balance we worked so hard to achieve in this city. (picks up a scroll from a stand) It could even cost us control of the Earth King. (he stops to gaze into the green flames of the fireplace)
Dai Li Agent: Should we take care of him?
Long Feng: (holding the scroll, gazes into the fire) No. It's much too dangerous to confront him directly. Let's see if we can still handle this... quietly.

(Cut to the cramped apartment complex where Zuko and Iroh live, then inside, where Iroh is packing into a chest. The door slides open and Zuko enters.)

Iroh: So, I was thinking about names for my new tea shop. How ;bout the Jasmine Dragon? It's dramatic, poetic, has a nice ring to it.
Zuko: The Avatar's here in Ba Sing Se. (holds out the leaflet) And he's lost his bison.
Iroh: (takes the leaflet) We have a chance for a new life here. (Zuko walks to stare out a window) If you start stirring up trouble, we could lose all the good things that are happening for us.
Zuko: (spins around to face Iroh, clearly irate) Good things that are happening for you. Have you ever thought that I want more from life than a nice apartment and a job serving tea?
Iroh: (earnestly) There is nothing wrong with a life of peace and prosperity. I suggest you think about what it is that you want for your life, and why.
Zuko: (turning to look outside again) I want my destiny.
Iroh: What that means is up to you. (Zuko walks away from the window) The Tea Weevil! (shakes his head in disgust) No, that's stupid.

(Cut to Sokka brushing paste onto a stone wall, and plastering up an Appa Poster. In a narrow alley, Katara and Aang are pasting more of them up. Toph leans against the wall with arms crossed, near Sokka. Momo perches above their heads.)

Sokka: Well split up to cover more area. Toph, I guess you should just come with me.
Toph: (peevishly)Why because you think I can't put up posters on my own?

(grabbing his brush, she slashes glue across the wall, then slams a poster against it, face down)

Toph: (dolefully) It's upside-down isn't it? I'll just go with Sokka. (she hands him back the brush, and they all split up)

(Cut to an open square, where Katara is affixing another poster to a stone plinth near a flowing water stream. Behind her, a familiar voice calls out.)

Jet: Katara?

(Jet is seen emerging from an alleyway at the edge of the square. Katara wheels around with a startled gasp, as Jet walks strides toward her.)

Jet: (smiling confidently) I think I can help you.

(Katara's shocked blush transforms into a look of pure outrage. With a sweep of her arms she bends up a pair of towering waves from the stream behind her, sending them crashing towards him.)

Jet: Katara! I've changed!

(Jet is overwhelmed by the tremendous cascade, and is swept backwards into the alleyway. Sliding into view, Katara draws a puddle up into a spinning sphere, ready to attack.)

Katara: Tell it to some other girl, Jet!

(Freezing the globe of water, she unleashes a barrage of ice spikes down the alley toward him. Whirling off-balance, Jet nonetheless manages to cut them out of the out of the air.)

Jet: I don't want to fight you! I'm here to help.

(Holding out his hook-swords, he drops them to the ground as Katara draws closer. She stops, not sure what to think. He reaches behind his back for something, and Katara pins him with a flurry of ice blades. Sokka, Toph and Aang come rushing up behind her.)

Sokka: Katara, what is it?
Katara: Jet's back.

(A long close-up of Jet's face, then fade to black.)



Act II

(The scene then re-opens in the alleyway.)

Katara: (resolutely) We can't trust anything Jet says.
Sokka: But we don't even know why he's here.
Katara: (with a hostile tone) I don't care why he's here. Whatever the reason is, it can't be good.
Jet: I'm here to help you find Appa.

(Still pinned to the wall, Jet opens his hand to let a leaflet unroll.)

Aang: (turning from the leaflet back to Katara) Katara, we have to give him a chance.
Jet: (earnestly) I swear, I've changed. I was a troubled person, and I let my anger get out of control. But I don't even have the gang now. I've put all that behind me.
Katara: (bitterly) You're lying!

(Toph pushes past Katara, and places her palm on the wall close to Jet.)

Toph: He's not lying.
Sokka: How can you tell?
Toph: I can feel his breathing and heart beat. When people lie, there is a physical reaction. He's telling the truth. (Toph, Aang and Sokka turn to Katara)
Aang: (beseechingly) Katara, we don't have any leads. If Jet says he can take us to Appa, we have to check it out.
Katara: (shoulders sagging in resignation) Alright... (suddenly stabbing a finger at Jet) but we're not letting you out of out sight!

(She stabs her finger at Jet once more for emphasis, eyes narrowed.

We cut to Jet entering a dimly lit warehouse, which sits empty except for a few sacks and a pile of canvas and rope.)

Jet: This is the place I heard about. (everyone begins looking around)
Aang: There's nothing here.
Katara: (angrily) If this is a trap...! (she readies an attack)
Jet: I told you, I work nearby! Two guys were talking about some giant furry creature they had. I figured it must be Appa.
Toph: (offscreen) He was here!

(Toph has discovered a handful of white fur, and the other rush to her side.)

Aang: (stroking the clump of fur sadly) We missed him.

(An old white haired man with a push-broom crosses behind the slumping Aang.)

Janitor: They took that big thing yesterday. (Aang straightens with a shocked look) Shipped him out to some island. About time, I've been cleaning up fur and various, uh leavings all day. (begins walking off again)
Aang: (frantically catching up with him) What island?! Where's Appa?!
Janitor: (wearily) Foreman said some rich royal type on Whaletail Island bought him up, guess for a zoo or such, though could be the meat would be good.
Aang: (anxiously) We've gotta get to Whaletail Island. (turns to the others, where Sokka is reading a map) Where's Whaletail Island?
Sokka: (glumly) Far. Very far. (lays the map of the world on the floor, pointing) Here it is. It's near the South Pole almost all the way back home. (Everyone kneels around the map.)
Katara: Aang, It'll take us weeks just to get to the tip of the Earth Kingdom. And then we'll need to find a boat to get to the island.
Aang: (standing) I don't care. We have a chance to find Appa. We have to try.
Janitor: (passing in the background) Must be nice to visit an island. I haven't had a vacation for years.
Katara: (crossly) Don't you have some more hair to clean up?
Janitor: (dismally) Shuffle on, I get ya. No more need for "old sweepy."
Katara: You're right Aang. (places hand on his shoulder) Right now, our first concern has to be finding Appa. We can come back when we have him.
Sokka: (setting off) All right, let's get moving.
Jet: (steppingtowards them) I'll come with you.
Katara: (firmly) We don't need you help.
Jet: Why won't you trust me? (walks after Sokka and Aang)
Katara: (arms crossed) Gee, I wonder? (turns and raises her head in a huff)
Toph: (standing beside her) Was this guy your boyfriend or something?
Katara: (startled) What? No! (turns her head the other direction)
Toph: (teasingly) I can tell you're lyyyyying.

(Katara stomps off blushing. We cut to the streets of Ba Sing Se, where Jet walks beside the four heroes.)

Sokka: We can take the train out to the wall, but then we'll have to walk.
Aang: (cheerfully) Don't worry, on the way back, we'll be flying!
Toph: (with exaggerated relief) We're finally leaving Ba Sing Se. (thows her arms wide) Worst city ever!

(As Toph starts to catch up with the others, we see Smellerbee and Longshot emerge from a side-street in the distance. Both seem astonished to see Jet in the street.)

Smellerbee: (shouting) Jet!

(Katara turns in surprise, as Jet continues walking indifferently. She looks to Jet angrily.)

Katara: (accusingly) I thought you said you didn't have your gang anymore?
Jet: (turns with a bewildered look) I don't.

(Smellerbee throws herself against Jet, wrapping her arms around him with a look of utter relief)

Smellerbee: We were so worried. How did you get away from the Dai Li?
Katara: (aghast) The Dai Li?!
Jet: I don't know what she's talking about? (everyone stops and draws closer to Jet and Smellerbee)
Smellerbee: He got arrested by the Dai Li a couple weeks ago. We saw them drag him away.
Jet: (baffled) Why would I be arrested? I've been living peacefully in the city.
Toph: (kneeling down, with a palm on the street between them) This doesn't make any sense. They're both telling the truth.
Katara: That's impossible.
Sokka: (thoughtfully) No, it's not. Toph can't tell who's lying because they both think they're telling the truth. Jet's been brainwashed. (points at Jet accusingly)
Jet: (distressed) That's crazy! It can't be. (starts looking around in a panic) Stay away from me.

(Everyone encircles Jet, and they begin to close in around him.

Cut to the night sky, lit by the full moon. A lone Dai Li agent walks down the street past the entrance to an alley. Charging up the street behind him is the masked figure of the Blue Spirit.)

Blue Spirit: Out of my way, skinny.

(He knocks the Dai Li to his knees, and continues rushing past him. The agent readies his stone-glove attack, but the Blue Spirit turns and disappears down a side street. Rising to his feet, the agent rushes in pursuit. Rounding the corner, he sees the Blue Spirit waiting in the darkness, and launches his stone gloves at him, one after the other. The second stone fist removes the Blue Spirit's head, which we now see is a straw-filled dummy. The dummy collapses to the ground. )

Dai Li Agent: (perplexed) Huh?

(There is the whisper of a drawn blade behind him, and the Blue Spirit appears at his back, placing a sword at his throat.)

Blue Spirit: (menacingly) If you don't want to end up like him. You'll do what I say.

(Cut to the outside of an apartment, where Momo suspends by his tail from a clothesline. Inside, from Jet's point of view, we see the Heroes and the Freedom fighters crowded together, regarding him suspiciously.)

Katara: The Dai Li must have sent Jet to mislead us, and that janitor was part of their plot too.
Aang: (looking to her) I bet they have Appa here in the city. Maybe he's in the same place they took Jet. (turns back to Jet) Where did they take you? (Jet is seen sitting on a stool, his head hanging low)
Jet: (befuddled) Nowhere. (raises his head) I, I don't know what you're talking about.
Aang: We need to find a way to jog his real memories.
Sokka: (provokingly) Maybe Katara could kiss him. That should bring something back.
Katara: (annoyed) Maybe you should kiss him, Sokka.
Sokka: (slyly) Hey, just an idea.
Aang: (peeved) A bad one.
Sokka: Oo, wait. I got it. (Sokka plucks a straw from his mattress, pokes it into Jet's mouth in trademark fashion, then regards him thoughtfully)
Jet: I don't think its working. Puh! (spits it onto the floor)
Toph: Try to think of something from your past that triggers your emotions.
Smellerbee: The Fire Nation, remember what they did to your family.
Katara: Close your eyes. Picture it.

(Jet closes his eyes, and sweat beads on his forehead. They suddenly snap wide as a light seems to flash inside his head, and we are transported back to the scene of his burning village. A screaming woman flees the blaze, as a young Jet stands transfixed at the dreadful scene. Surrounded by flames, the leader of the Rough Riders turns slowly to glare at him. Young Jet stands there helplessly, tears streaming down his face as the bright embers waft about him. We return to a close-up of Jet's horror-struck eyes, then he droops for a while, exhausted.)

Jet: (shaken) No! It's too painful.
Katara: Maybe this will help.

(Katara steps behind him, drawing out a portion of her bending water. She places moves the water and her hands to the sides of his head, and we see the glow of her healing powers. Jet stares down at the shadow cast on the floor before him by the light of her energies. As his eyes follow the floorboards, gaps appear, revealing blue waters. The far side of the room is replaced by the distant shore of a great lake, and Long Feng can be seen standing in the distance upon its surface. Long Feng regards Jet grimly, and suddenly Jet plunges down into the dark depths of the lake. He emerges inside a vast man-made subterranean chamber. The scene flashes to show him being subjected to the hypnotic light of an orbiting lantern by a pair of Dai Li agents. He shuts his eyes against the light, and the scene changes to the closed eyes of Jet inside the apartment.)

Jet: (tentatively) They took me to a headquarters under the water, like a lake.
Sokka: Wait! Remember what Joo Dee said? She said she went on vacation to Lake Laogai.
Jet: (jumping to his feet) That's it! Lake Laogai.

(The scene fades to black.)



Act III

(Scene opens to the aerial view of a vast lake, surrounded by rugged hills. In a shot from the shore, we see the Freedom Fighters and the Heroes lined up on the misty shore.)

Sokka: So where's this secret headquarters?
Jet: (scratching his head) Under the lake I think.
Toph: (pointing to her right) There's a tunnel right there near the shore.

(She walks that direction, whistling. Reaching the water's edge Toph jumps up in an earthbending move, and a stone pathway rises to the surface. Toph walks along it to a stone disc, which she bends aside. Everyone peers down into the dark shaft, and Momo flies away chittering nervously. From the depths of the shaft, we see a narrow ladder leads up to the tiny circle of light where the heroes stand, far above. The scene changes to a view of the underground base similar to the one in Jet's vision, a crosshatch of large passages lit by greenish firestone lanterns. A pair of Dai Li walk off into a side tunnel, and we pan back to see the assembled group cautiously descending a dark stairway to the main chamber.)

Jet: (leading the group) It's all starting to come back to me.

(Jet edges quietly to a partially opened door, then moves on, followed by the others. As they peer inside in turn, they see rows of identically dressed young women standing hypnotically before a Dai Li agent.)

Dai Li Agent: I'm Joo Dee. Welcome to Ba Sing Se.
Joo Dees: (in perfect unison) I'm Joo Dee. Welcome to Ba Sing Se.
Dai Li Agent: We are so lucky to have our walls to create order.
Joo Dees: (in perfect unison) We are so lucky to have our walls to create order.
Jet: (once more leading) I think there might be a cell big enough to hold Appa up ahead. (he stops before a sealed stone door) I think it's through here.

(We see the stone door slide away from the other side, and light spills into a chamber. Inside Appa is chained to the floor, and the light from the doorway casts the shadow of a figure on him as the bison rises. Appa moans uncertainly.)

Zuko/Blue Spirit: Expecting someone else? (stepping into the chamber, he draws a sword, while Appa shifts nervously in his chains)

(An identical door slides open, revealing Jet, with the others behind him. Inside a massive shadowy cavern, the dark shapes of Dai Li can be barely seen suspended from the ceiling. Far below, the heroes cautiously enter, and the stone door abruptly slides shut behind them. They spin around in surprise, as the room is plunged into darkness, then green lanterns flare to life, illuminating the vast cave. Only now do they notice the Dai Li high above them, suspended from chains or clinging to the ceiling itself. Ahead, Long Feng waits with several more Dai Li.)

Sokka: (as everyone stares up) Now that's something different.
Long Feng: (grimly) You have made yourselves enemies of the state. (The camera pans across the determined faces of the heroes, as Longshot notches an arrow.) Take them into custody.

(The Dai Li drop down to the floor, encircling the heroes. Two agents launch a stone fist attack, but Toph disintegrates them in mid-flight. As the dust clears, she launches them across the room with a pair of rock pillars.

Behind her, Jet turns and rushes another pair, cutting their stone fist projectiles from the air. Sliding along the ground past the first, he trips the second with his hook sword, slamming him hard to the ground.

Long Feng watches dispassionately as Aang deals with two more of his Dai Li with air and earthbending. Katara and Sokka manage to destroy two more of the glove projectiles before being seized by two more. Toph intervenes with a stone wall before they can be drug to the waiting Dai Li. They send a rush of stone towards Toph, but she rises high into the cavern on a pillar of rock, forcing them to pursue her the same way.

Two more Dai Li race up the walls to either side of her, to strike out at Toph with horizontal columns of stone. High in the cavern, Toph swats aside the first two agents, then leaps to avoid the two columns as they crash together beneath her. Landing atop them, she bends up a pair of stone blocks from the columns, using them to drive away both of the remaining agents simultaneously. A fist of stone grabs the back of her shirt, and she is hauled through the air toward a waiting Dai Li. Jet intervenes at the last moment. Leaping past he hooks her belt with his sword, pulling her to safety as the agent kicks a stone foot attack after them. Longshot covers them as they land, intercepting the missile with one of his arrows. Joined by two of his brethren, the Dai Li retaliate with three fist attacks at Longshot, but Jet cuts them from the air with a whirlwind of slashes.

Meanwhile Long Feng has seen enough. He flees from the room, sealing a stone door behind him. Back at the battle, Aang lands and blows two Dai Li aside with a burst of air.)

Aang: Long Feng is escaping!

(Aang and Jet break free from the melee to pursue him. Aang blasts open the stone door, and they race down the passageway after the minister. They follow him as he turns into yet another chamber, a large room filled with pipe openings. As the enter, the door seals behind them, and Long Feng drops from the ceiling behind them.)

Long Feng: (threateningly) Alright Avatar, you've caused me enough problems. This is your last chance, ifyou want your bison back.
Aang: (outraged) You do have Appa. Tell me where he is!
Long Feng: Agree to exit the city now, and I'll waive all charges against you and allow you to leave with your lost pet.
Jet: (raising his swords) You're in no position to bargain.
Long Feng: (haughtily) Am I not?
Aang: (brandishing his staff) You're definitely not!
Long Feng: Jet, The Earth King has invited you to Lake Laogai.
Jet: (pupils dilating) I am honored to except his invitation.

(Jet suddenly makes a brutal double slash at Aang's neck, which he nimbly avoids.

Leaping away from him, Aang reels backward in dismay as Jet charges him, snarling with anger.

Cut to Appa in his cell. He is growling and stamping his feet at the Blue Spirit, who stands just beyond his reach.)

Blue Spirit: You're mine now.

(The door behind the Blue Spirit, and a shadow is seen in the light spilling inward. The Blue Spirit turns and readies both his swords to attack. Iroh enters the room, closing the door behind him.)

Blue Spirit: (taken aback) Uncle?
Iroh: (feigning puzzlement) So, the Blue Spirit. I wonder who could be behind that mask?
Zuko: (removing his mask) What are you doing here?
Iroh: I was just about to ask you the same thing. What do you plan to do now that you have found the Avatar's bison? Keep it locked in our new apartment? Should I go put on a pot of tea for him?
Zuko: First I have to get it out of here.
Iroh: (incensed)AND THEN WHAT?! You never think these things through! This is exactly what happened when you captured the Avatar at the North Pole! You had him, and then you had no where to go!
Zuko: (heatedly) I would have figured something out!
Iroh: (shouting angrily) No!! If his friends hadn't found you, you would have frozen to death!
Zuko: (looking away in anguish) I know my own destiny uncle.
Iroh: (forcefully) Is it your own destiny? Or is it a destiny someone else has tried to force on you?
Zuko: (in torment) Stop it Uncle. I have to do this. (turns away, toward Appa)
Iroh: (pleading furiously) I'm begging you Prince Zuko! It's time for you to look inward, and begin asking yourself the big questions. Who are you? And what do you want?

(With a cry of frustration, Zuko hurls both of his swords to the ground, followed by the Blue Spirit mask. The camera rises towards the opening in the distant ceiling. Appa is shown anchored by chains on each of his legs, as Zuko's shout continues to echo throughout the chamber.

We return to Jet and Aang, as Aang backpedals in a desperate attempt to avoid Jet's furious assault. He pleads with Jet as he continues to dodge his attacks.)

Aang: (desperately) Jet, it's me Aang! You don't have to do this.
Long Feng: I'm afraid he no longer has a choice.

(Standing between them, a panting Jet, pauses to catch his breath. His eyes remain inky pools, and sweat runs down his face. With a shout, he renews his attack, showing evidence of tiring as Aang evades him. The Avatar propels him backwards with a blast of air. Jet slows himself with the hooks of his swords, which spark against the stone floor. Aang takes this opportunity to resume pleading with him.)

Aang: Jet, I'm your friend! Look inside your heart! (Jet, gasping, seems conflicted)
Long Feng: Do your duty Jet. (Jet slowly approaches Aang, swords raised)
Aang: He can't make you do this! You're a Freedom Fighter.

(At these final words, Jet straightens in shock. Everything goes white, and a tableau of images from his past flood his mind. We see Smellerbee, brandishing two swords in front of a tent, a dagger clenched in her teeth. The Duke and Pipsqueak are shown standing together. Scenes of him standing against a shy Katara. Cheers of the Freedom fighters as they feast in the tree fortress. Standing with Smellerbee and Longshot aboard the ferry. Sitting and speaking with Iroh and Zuko on the ferry deck. Handing food out to the passengers. Being dragged away by the Dai Li, and the brainwashing beneath the lake. Faces flash by rapidly, Iroh, Colonel Mongke, Long Feng, his own at various ages. Jet stands motionless, overcome by the thoughts racing through his brain. Behind him, Long Feng's voice cuts through his mental fog.)

Long Feng: Do it! Do it now!

(With a snarl of rage, Jet whirls and hurls one of his swords directly at Long Feng. It shrieks toward him, imbedding its pommel-spike in the stone wall as Long Feng avoids it. Long Feng simultaneously attacks with his earthbending, sending an out-thrust of stone rocketing towards Jet. When the dust clears, we see Jet is lying on the ground motionless, having taken the full brunt of the brutal attack. Momentarily stunned by the ferocious attack, the Avatar starts to rush Long Feng, who lifts himself to the entrance of a tunnel on a column of stone.)

Long Feng: (contemptuously) Foolish boy. You've chosen your own demise.

(He turns and vanished down the dark passage, as Aang moves over to where Jet lies.)

Jet: (weakly) I'm sorry, Aang.
Aang: (sitting at his side) Don't be.

(Behind Aang, the doorway slides open, revealing the rest of his allies. They all rush forward to surround the stricken Jet, wearing sorrowful and shocked expressions. Katara draws forth her bending water, kneels beside him, and applies her healing powers to his chest.)

Katara: (turning to the others) This isn't good.
Smellerbee: You guys go find Appa. We'll take care of Jet.
Katara: We're not going to leave you.
Longshot: (speaking for the first time) There's no time. Just go. We'll take care of him. He's our leader. (The four heroes look at him with expressions of wonder.)
Jet: (tenderly) Don't worry Katara, I'll be fine.

(Jet smiles weakly up at her, and she closes her eyes in grief before rising to her feet. The heroes file off somberly, leaving the Freedom Fighters behind. Toph and Sokka bring up the rear.

Toph: (softly) He's lying.

(Behind them, Smellerbee weeps over Jet. Longshot watches the heroes disappear down a passageway, before readying an arrow to cover the other entrance. Smellerbee gently strokes Jet's forehead as he prepares his final stand.

Cut to a stone door, which slides aside to reveal Toph, with the others close behind her. They step into a room where the six manacles lie empty within the prison.)

Aang: Appa's gone. Long Feng beat us here.
Sokka: If we keep moving, maybe we can catch up to him.

(An outcropping of rock bearing a circular stone plug arises at the edge of the lake. Cracks form on the plug, and it shoots off to shatter on the nearby cliff face. The four heroes emerge and start racing along the narrow shoreline. Glancing over his shoulder, Aang sees nine Dai Li emerge in pursuit from the hole behind them.)

Sokka: (running beside Aang) Do you think we can out run them?
Aang: I don't think it's gonna matter.

(Ahead we see six more Dai Li flanking the waiting Long Feng. The six agents bend up a thirty foot wall of stone beneath Long Fengs feet, sealing the strip of land between the cliffside and the lake. The heroes draw to a stop, and behind them the Dai Li raise up another wall, boxing them in. They are enclosed and surrounded by eighteen Dai Li, who cling to the edges of the walls and the cliffside while Long Feng watches from atop the first wall. Momo, sweeps down out of the sky and lands on Aang's shoulder chattering excitedly.)

Aang: What is it Momo?

(Momo launches upward, past Long Feng, to disappear into the bright midday sun. Moments later Appa emerges from the dazzling light, hurtling downwards towards them. The four heroes look upwards with expressions of delight.)

Aang: Appa!

(Appa swoops down and smashes through the first wall, continuing onward through the second. The Dai Li perched on the wall are knocked senseless by the bursting walls, and fall to the ground or spill into the water. Aang and Toph bend the cliff that the remaining agents are perched on, flinging them far out into the lake. Appa circles around to land heavily near the shaken Long Feng, as the remaining Dai Li flee. Turning from his fleeing men, Long Feng faces an enraged Appa.)

Long Feng: I can handle you by myself.

(He launches a kick at Appa, who catches his leg in his teeth. With a mighty toss of his powerful neck, Appa sends him skipping far out across Lake Laogai, to disappear with a final splash. The sky-bison pauses momentarily before spitting out his shoe. Aang, Sokka, Katara and Momo throw themselves onto the shaggy bison, while Toph strokes his nose.)

Sokka: (hugging his leg) Yeah! Appa!
Aang: (head pressed in his fur, crying) I missed you, buddy.

(Appa's great brown eyes close in contentment. We cut to the heroes riding Appa over Lake Laogai. Katara stares down wistfully at the lake's surface, eyes brimming with tears. Aang puts a hand on her shoulder, and she turns back to them, wiping a tear. All four of the gather in an embrace, as Appa carries them off into the distance. Panning to the shore, we see Zuko and Iroh emerge from the passage originally uncovered by Toph.)

Iroh: You did the right thing, nephew. (Zuko pulls out the Blue Spirit mask, regarding its demonic visage as Iroh rests a hand on its shoulder) Leave it behind.

(Zuko walks to the edge and drops the mask into the lake, where it slowly sinks into the depths.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence includes clips from "Appa's Lost Days", "City of Walls and Secrets", and "Lake Laogai".]



Act I

(The scene opens over the vast waters of Lake Laogai. Aang, Katara, Sokka, Toph, Appa and Momo have stopped on a tiny islet in the center of the lake. Aang is embracing Appa, clinging to the fur on the bison's massive brow.)

Aang: (ardently) I missed you more than you'll ever know, buddy.

(Momo alights next to Aang, also hugging Appa. Appa licks a laughing Aang off of his face with his huge tongue. Pulling back, we see Sokka walk over to talk with Katara and Toph, who is sitting on the ground.)

Sokka: (confidently) Look, we escaped from the Dai Li, we got Appa back, I'm telling you, we should go to the Earth King now and tell him our plan. We're on a roll.
Katara: (critically) One good hour after weeks of trouble isn't much of a roll.
Sokka: We can build on it. If we want to invade the Fire Nation when the eclipse happens, we need the Earth King's support.

(Aang continues petting Appa in the background.)

Toph: What makes you think we'll get it? I don't know if you've noticed, but things don't usually go that smoothly for our little gang.
Sokka: I know, but I've got a good feeling about this. This time will be different.
Katara: (unconvinced) Sokka, Long Feng is control of the city. His conspiracy with the Dai Li is too powerful. I think we should just keep flying and leave this horrible place behind us.
Toph: I'm with sweetness. I've seen enough of Ba Sing Se, (raises arms and opens eyes wide) and I can't even see!
Aang: (leaping into the scene) But now that we have Appa back, there is nothing stopping us from telling the Earth King the truth about the conspiracy and the war.
Sokka: See, Aang's with me. (puts arm over smiling Aang's shoulder, flashing a wide grin) It's the whole reason we came here in the first place, we have to try.
Katara: (thoughtfully) Well, I guess if the Earth King knew the truth, things could change. (both boys smile again)
Toph: (rising to feet) I don't trust the new positive Sokka. (points accusingly) Long Feng brainwashed you, didn't he!

(Aang suddenly notices something off to his left. He rushes to the edge of the water, and we see that he has spied three Earth Kingdom ships off in the distance. Katara and Sokka rush up beside him.)

Sokka: That's probably the Dai Li searching for us. (turns to Katara) So?
Katara: (pauses, then decisively) Let's fly!

(Cut to Appa, soaring toward the palace of Ba Sing Se. He roars defiantly as he turns to start his descent. The heroes are clinging to the fur on his back, with Aang riding on his neck. Toph in particular is holding on for dear life.)

Toph: (pleading) Can we please buy a new saddle? Riding bareback is terrifying! (buries face in Appa's back)

(In another shot, we see Appa descending toward the distant palace, a massive complex at the center of the city, surrounded by a circular wall.)

Sokka: There it is. That whole thing is the palace. The Earth King's chambers should be in the center. (another shot of the palace, and the vast open plaza in front)
Katara: We have to be careful. Long Feng's probably warned the King that we're coming.
Sokka: Why would you assume that? If you ask me, I think we're just gonna sail right in....Ahhh!

(Appa evades a massive stone that streaks up and past them, leaving a billowing trail of dust behind it. The sky-bison emerges from the smoke cloud with a growl of defiance.)

Toph: (shouting over the wind) What was that?!
Sokka: (shouting in alarm) Surface to air rocks! (below, several rows of massive, puck-shaped boulders are being launched skyward by teams of earthbending troops) More incoming! Ahhh!

(Appa manages to evade several more of the streaking missiles, which are being shot in rapid succession. Two earthbenders lift the Appa-sized stones from the ground, and two more rush forward to send one hurtling toward the heroes. Aang stares steadily ahead at the palace as the fly over the launch sites. One of the massive stones arcs directly at him, but he backhands it casually, shattering it without even glancing away. Appa emerges from the dust once more as more projectiles streak towards him. Aang splits a boulder with a strike of his staff, sending either half safely to the side.

Below, an earth kingdom commander, mounted upon an armored ostrich-horse, signals to the scores of earthbenders arrayed behind him on the central causeway. Appa continues to plunge toward the palace, with Aang perched on his left horn. The Avatar leaps downward to land directly in front of the commander. Striking the ground with the full force of his descent, Aang earthbends a cascading ring of rising stone blocks, which spread outward like a shockwave. The earthbender troops are flung into the air like rag-dolls, to drop insensible to the plaza surface. Appa lands directly in front of the mounted commander, and bringing his huge face close, knocks him off his mount with a mighty roar. The ostrich horse flees in panic, and the commander crawls away.

Aang stride forward with an intense glare, as behind him the others leap to dismount from Appa's back. Everyone dashes together toward the palace stairs along the block-paved causeway. Ahead, more earthbenders line either side of their path. Acting in unison, each bends up a head-sized block of stone, and punches it at the heroes. Aang swipes some of them from the air, while Toph pushes up projections of stone to block others. Twirling his staff around his body, the Avatar causes the large stone blocks of the causeway to rotate, shielding them from yet more of the attacks. Meanwhile, Katara is stunning the men with vicious cracks of her long water whip.)

Katara: Sorry! (winces at the soldiers cries of pain)

(Yet another group of earthbenders rush down the causeway toward them. With a single earthbending move, Toph flips the causeway up like so many dominoes, then topples them backwards. The soldiers are pinned helplessly at the waist by the large sheets of stone. Katara addresses them as she rushes past.)

Katara: Sorry! We just need to get through to see the Earth King.

(From a high view, we see the heroes approaching a moat at the foot of the wide stairs. More earthbender troops wait up the first flight of stairs, and dozens more approach from either flank. With a tremendous effort, the benders on the stairs lift a pair of enormous badger-mole statues. They hurl them from atop the stairs to plunge down at the heroes. Sokka looks up in horror as the statue's shadow falls over him. Toph and Aang quickly bend up a massive barrier of stone blocks over everyone, and the two statues ricochet off it with ground-shaking crash.

Emerging from behind the barrier, Katara dashes forward, drawing her water once more from her reserve. She crafts a narrow arcing ramp on the edge of the moat ahead of her. She uses it to launch herself up and over the moat, simultaneously drawing a tendril of water from below her. She twirls in the air, imparting a spin to the long strand orbiting her. Landing gracefully, she slaps them into the moat, tumbles and lands in a defensive stance. Spotting another group of soldiers, she sends out a tentacle of water to snatch them into the moat as well.

Aang leaps across the moat, and with a frigid gust of wind he freezes the surface of the water, trapping the guardsmen. Appa and the others make their way across the bridge behind him. The heroes regroup on the other side of the moat, as more rocks rain down from atop the towering main palace stair. Yet another wave of warriors pours forth from the palace, racing down the stairs to join the battle. With a mighty expression of earthbending power, Toph causes the entire length of the great stair to begin folding in on itself, leaving a smooth stone ramp. The earth guard begin to slide helplessly downward, as Toph and Aang bend an elevator platform of stone and begin ascending the ramp. Dozen of soldiers fall past them as they rise.)

Sokka: Seriously, we're actually on your guys' side. (soldiers continue to slide past) Sorry.

(As the earthbending elevator reaches the top of the stairs, another dozen earthguards close in from either flank. Toph and Aang each bend up a wall of stone, and use them to drive back the approaching warriors. Finally, the team reaches the entrance to the palace proper, and hurry inside.)

Sokka: In there.

(Rushing down a long hall, they come to a four-way intersection in a large vaulted room. More guards issue from the other three passageways. With a stomp of her foot, Toph pins several of the to the ceiling with up-thrust pillars of rock. As she continues to wield her powers against them, Sokka addresses her.)

Sokka: Toph, which way to the Earth King?
Toph: How should I know? I'm still voting that we leave Ba Sing Se.

(As she finishes speaking, Toph drives two guards back with a rippling wave of stone. As the other continue the fight, Sokka starts pushing open doors. Inside the third room, a woman in an elegant dress is standing before a long mirror.)

Woman in the Palace: (screaming) Burglar! (tries to run, trips and falls on her face)
Sokka: (closing door behind him) Sorry, wrong door.

(The scene changes to the exterior of the apartment buildings where Zuko and Iroh stay. Looking through their window, we see a downtrodden Zuko enter the apartment, followed by a pleased-looking Iroh.)

Iroh: You did the right thing, letting the Avatar's bison go free. (closes door behind him)
Zuko: (feebly) I don't feel right.

(From Zuko's point of view, we see his vision begin to blur and grow dark. He suddenly collapses unconscious to the floor, breaking a vase in the process.)

Iroh: (alarmed) Zuko! (rushes to his nephews side)

(Returning to the Earth King's palace, we find the heroes standing in a vast hall. Behind them the passage is choked with rubble and wreckage. Turning, Sokka climbs atop the debris to look past it. Down the passageway he spies a massive set of double doors, clad in gold.)

Sokka: Now that's an impressive door. It's gotta go somewhere.

(Leaping down and sprinting down the hall, Sokka launches a flying kick at the colossal doors. His foot impacts with absolutely no effect, and he hangs in the air a moment before dropping comically to the floor. He jumps up and begins pushing ineffectually at them, just as Toph and Aang close in behind him. They strike the doors with their bending powers, causing them to explode off their hinges. With a startled cry, Sokka is flung inward with the doors, and skids to a stop on his face.)

Sokka: A little warning next time! (rubs the back of his head as he rises)

(The heroes rush past the fallen doors into a vast chamber lined with ornate pillars and lit by hanging lanterns. The draw to a stop before a large dais, weapons at the ready. Seated upon a golden throne is the Earth King himself. He is a bespectacled young man wearing a simple crown and necklace of jade beads. Long Feng suddenly interposes himself in front of the king, followed by a protective line of Dai Li agents. Both sides seem prepared to join battle.)

Aang: (urgently) We need to talk to you!
Long Feng: (turning to the king) They're here to overthrow you.
Sokka: No, we're on your side. We're here to help.
Katara: (appealing) You have to trust us.
Earth King: (rising with an aggravated tone) You invade my palace, lay waste to all my guards, break down my fancy door, and you expect me to trust you?
Toph: (sardonically) He has a good point.
Earth King: If you're own my side, then drop your weapons and stand down. (one by one, the heroes drop their weapons to the floor)
Aang: (attempting charm) See, we're friends, your Earthiness.

(The King, unimpressed, continues to frown grimly. With a wave of his arm, Long Feng signals for the Dai Li to attack. They project their stone gloves at the startled heroes, binding their arms behind their backs. As Aang strains against his bonds, Long Feng smiles wickedly, and the scene fades to black.)



Act II

The scene reopens to a shot of the elaborate dais, showing the five Dai Li standing ready before Long Feng and the Earth King.)

Long Feng: Detain the assailants. (the Dai Li skate forward to take up positions behind the heroes)
Sokka: (confused) But we dropped our weapons. We're your allies.
Long Feng: Make sure the Avatar and his friends never see daylight again.
Earth King: (surprised) The Avatar? You're the Avatar? (points at Sokka)
Sokka: Uh, no, him. (nods his head toward Aang)
Aang: Over here. (effortlessly escaping his bonds, Aang raises up his arms, then allows them to be bound behind him again)
Long Feng: What does it matter Your Highness? They're enemies of the state.
Earth King: (uncertainly) Perhaps you're right.

(The Earth King's pet bear walks up to Aang, sniffs and then licks his face, causing Aang to giggle.)

Earth King: (amused) Though Bosco seems to like him. (turns serious) I'll hear what he has to say.

(Long Feng's eyes narrow with displeasure.)

Aang: (approaching the throne) Well, sir, there is a war going on right now. For the past 100 years, in fact. The Dai Li's kept it secret from you. It's a conspiracy to control the city, and to control you.
Earth King: (dismayed) A secret war? That's crazy!
Long Feng: (derisively) Completely!
Aang: (accusingly) Long Feng didn't want us to tell you, so he stole our Sky Bison to blackmail us. And blackmail is the least of his crimes, he brain washed our friend!
Long Feng: (turning to the King) All lies. I've never even seen a Sky Bison, Your Majesty. (looks aside) Frankly, I thought they were extinct.
Earth King: (sits back on his throne, skeptical) Your claim is difficult to believe, even from an Avatar.
Long Feng: (whispering conspiratorially) These hooligans are part of an anarchist cell that my agents have been tracking for weeks. If you listen to them, you're playing right into your own destruction.
Earth King: (resigned) I have to trust my advisor.

(Aang looks distraught as one of the Dai Li steps forward for him. As they are being led from the throne room, Sokka suddenly turns with a look of inspiration.)

Sokka: Wait, I can prove he's lying. Long Feng said he's never seen a Sky Bison, ask him to lift his robe.
Long Feng: (appalled) What?! I am not disrobing!

(The Earth King looks thoughtful again. Aang and Sokka smile and nod knowingly at each other. The Avatar draws in a mighty breath of air, and blows a powerful gust of wind at Long Feng, blowing up his minister's robes. The toothmark bruise he received from Appa can be clearly seen on his left leg.)

Aang: Right there! Appa bit him.
Sokka: (smugly) Never met a Sky Bison , huh?
Long Feng: (pushing down his robes, feigning embarrassment) That happens to be a large birthmark. Thanks for showing everyone.
Earth King: Well, I suppose there's no way to prove where those marks came from.
Sokka: Of course there is!

(The scene changes to show Appa standing behind the heroes in the throne room. Appa gapes open his huge mouth. Aang points to one of his large teeth, then slides over to point at the matching bruise on the minister's leg.)

Earth King: (convinced) Yup, that pretty much proves it. (Aang slides out of the scene comically)
Gang: (pumping arms in the air) Yeah! Woo!
Earth King: But it doesn't prove this crazy conspiracy theory.
Gang: (slumping in disappointment) Awww.
Earth King: Though, I suppose this matter is worth looking into.
Gang: (gesturing uncertainly) Uh, ok, we'll take it. Yeah.

(A apprehensive looking Long Feng exits the throne room, followed by his Dai Li agents.

The scene changes to show a feverish Zuko, tossing and moaning on his futon in the apartment. Iroh is kneeling next to him, and reaches to take a cloth from a tub of water.)

Iroh: You're burning up. You have an intense fever. (places cloth over Zuko's brow) This will help cool you down.
Zuko: (feebly) So thirsty. (tries to sit up, but is pushed back down by Iroh)
Iroh: Here's some clean water to drink. (ladles water from another bucket, and supports Zuko's shoulders while he drinks) Stay under the blankets, and sweat this out.

(Zuko snatches the ladle from him and drains it completely. He tosses it away, turns and grabs up the bucket, pouring it down his throat and splashing his chest. He hurls it against a wall before settling back down, coughing.

We cut to see the Ba Sing Se train passing over the city on its raised track. Inside, the passengers wear stunned expressions. Everyone is staring at the Earth King, who stands in the center of the car, flanked by four of his guardsmen.)

Earth King: (uncomfortably) So, this is what a train is like? I didn't realize it would be this... public. (we can now see the rows of passengers seated to either side of him)
Katara: (astonished) So you've never been outside the upper ring before?
Earth King: I've never been outside of the palace. (points out a window) Now that's the way to travel. (Appa is flying alongside the train, Momo riding on his head) So, may I ask where we're going?
Sokka: Underneath Lake Laogai, Your Kingliness. To the Dai Li's secret headquarters. You're about to see where all the brainwashing and conspiring took place.

(Cut to the shores of Lake Laogai. The heroes stand on the shore beside the Earth King and his guards. Toph steps to the edge of the water, and with a hop, attempts to raise the causeway that leads to the underground passage. However, only broken rubble rises to the surface.)

Toph: It's gone!
Sokka: (raises hands to his face in dismay) Oh, don't tell me.. (slumps, then recovers and flashes a thumbs-up) That's ok, still got my positive attitude.
Katara: The Dai Li must have known we were coming and destroyed the evidence.
Earth King: (frowning suspiciously) Hmm. That seems awfully convenient.
Sokka: Hey, if anything, this proves the conspiracy exists even more.
Earth King: (dissatisfied) Long Feng was right, this was a waste of time. If you'll excuse me, I'm going back to the palace. (turns to leave with his guards)
Katara: (suddenly inspired) The wall! They'll never be able to cover that up in time!
Aang: Oh yeah. (Aaag vaults upward, to land in front of the departing King) If you come with us to the outer wall, we can prove to you that the secret war is real!
Earth King (annoyed) No Earth King has ever been to the outer wall. I don't have anymore time for this nonsense. (brushes past a sad Aang)
Sokka: (rushing up) If you come with us, this time you can ride on Appa.

(The Earth King pauses as Appa lows in the background. A pleased smile grows on his face. Cut to show him screaming in fright, his clothes flapping in the wind. He is clinging to the back of the flying air-bison.)

Earth King: Ahhhh!
Toph: (irreverently) First time flying?
Earth King: (breathlessly) Its both thrilling and terrifying.
Toph: Yeah, I hate it too.
Earth King: I have to be honest with you. Part of me really hopes that what you are telling me about this war...isn't true.
Aang: (under his breath) I wish it wasn't.

(From a high aerial view, we see Appa soaring over the patchwork fields that lie between the city and the outer wall. Then the scene changes to the interior of the apartment, where Iroh sits near a sleeping Zuko. He mops the feverish Zuko's brow with a damp cloth as the prince continues to moan and toss. As we draw closer to Zuko's face, everything goes white briefly and we share his fever-dream.

In his dreams, a figure kneels upon the Firelord's throne-mat, behind a screen of golden flames. Rows of fire nation soldiers genuflect towards the throne, and we see that they bow towards Zuko. Clad in the raiment and crown of the Firelord, his serene face is without scar or blemish. As he sits impassively, two sinuous dragons, one blue and one red, slither down nearby pillars to address him.)

Blue Dragon: (in Azula's voice) It's getting late. Are you planning to retire soon, my Lord?
Zuko: I'm not tired.
Blue Dragon: (drawing close to his face) Relax, Fire Lord Zuko. Just let go, give into it. Shut your eyes for awhile.
Red Dragon: (in Iroh's insistent voice) No, Fire Lord Zuko! Do not listen to the Blue Dragon. You should get out of here right now. Go! Before it's too late! (both dragons are poised to either side of Zuko)
Blue Dragon: Sleep now, Fire Lord Zuko.

(Both dragons disappear. The throne room is swallowed by inky blackness, and the four pillars crumble and fall into the void. As the room falls dark, the soldier's armor collapses to the floor, empty. Zuko searches the darkness, eyes wide with distress. Two golden eyes appear, then the face of the Blue Dragon, which closes rapidly.)

Blue Dragon: (in a rising voice) Sleep, just Like MOTHER!!

(The dragons jaws gape wide, swallowing Zuko in complete darkness. Within that darkness we draw closer to the figure of Ursa, who drops her hood as we draw closer.)

Ursa: (plaintively) Zuko, help me!

(We see Zuko's distraught face reflected in her eyes, as we seem to fall into them. Firelord Zuko is kneeling once more on the throne-mat in a sea of blackness, and a hole seems to open up beneath him, swallowing everything. Returning to the apartment, we see that the prince's face is looked in a feverish grimace.

Cut to show Appa carrying everyone to the top of the outer wall. As they pass atop it, Aang points down excitedly.)

Aang: It's still there!
Earth King: (in wonderment) What is that?
Sokka: It's a drill. A giant drill made by the Fire Nation, to break through your walls.

(As Sokka speaks, we see the Drill far below them, still partially imbedded in the great wall. It sits in a lake of slurry and is enclosed by a recently erected perimeter of stone wall. The Earth King wears a stunned expression. Now atop the great wall, the Earth King gazes down at the massive machine penetrating the outer defenses.)

Earth King: (shaken) I can't believe I never knew. (he looks to his right as Long Feng arrives on a stone elevator, flanked by two of his agents)
Long Feng: (reasonably) I can explain this, Your Majesty. (approaches) This is nothing more than... a construction project. (gestures down at the Drill)
Katara: (sarcastically) Really Then perhaps you can explain why there's a Fire Nation insignia on your construction project. (gestures toward the drill, which bears the symbol clearly upon its back)
Long Feng: (lamely) Well, it's imported of course. You know you can't trust domestic machinery. (smiles weakly, everyone stares at him) Surely you don't believe these children, instead of your most loyal attendant?!

(The Earth King, clearly in shock, looks first to the heroes then over to Long Feng, who wears an unreadable expression.)

Earth King: (firmly) Dai Li, arrest Long Feng. I want him to stand trial for crimes against the Earth Kingdom.

(Long Feng's expression changes to one of alarm. The heroes look surprised at this sudden victory. The two Dai Li agents exchange glances, and then snare Long Feng's wrists in their chain-manacles. They pull him backwards, securing his arms behind him.)

Long Feng: (outraged) You can't arrest me. You all need me more than you know! (is drug away by the agents)
Sokka: (shouting after him mockingly) Looks like Long Feng is "long gone"! Ha...Oh, yeah, I've been waitin' to use that one. (rubs a tear from one of his eyes)

(Scene fades to black for commercial break.)



Act III

(The show returns to a night-time view of the palace, then inside the Earth Kings throne room. The four heroes are lined before the base of the dais. The King is seated on his throne, his pet bear sitting at his feet.)

Earth King: I want to thank you, young heroes for opening my eyes. All this time, what I thought was a great metropolis, was merely a city of fools, and that makes me the king fool. (buries his face in one of his hands) We're at war, with the Fire Nation.
Sokka: (stepping forward) That's why we came to Ba Sing Se, Your Highness. Because we think you can help us end the war. (Momo perches on the King's shoulder)
Aang: (earnestly) We don't have much time. There's a comet coming this summer. Its energy will give the fire benders unbelievable strength. They'll be unstoppable. (Momo hops to sit atop Bosco, as the Earth King leans forward intently)
Sokka: But there is hope. Before the comet comes, we have a window of opportunity. A solar eclipse is coming. The sun will be entirely blocked out by the moon, and the fire benders will be helpless.
Earth King: What are you suggesting, Sokka?
Sokka: (decisively) That's the day we need to invade the Fire Nation. The Day of Black Sun.
Earth King: (apprehensively) I don't know. That would require moving troops out of Ba Sing Se. We'd be completely vulnerable.
Sokka: You're already vulnerable. The Fire Nation won't stop until Ba Sing Se falls. You can either sit back and wait for that to happen, or take the offensive, and give yourself a fighting chance. (everyone waits anxiously as the King considers his options)
Earth King: Very well. You have my support.
Gang: (drawing together) Woo! Alright! Good work team! (Sokka, Toph and Katara hug, as Aang circles them on an air scooter)
General How: (entering the throne room) Your Majesty. I apologize for the interruption. (he walks up next to the heroes, at the base of the dais, and drops to his hands and knees)
Earth King: This is General How, he's the leader of The Council of Five. My highest- ranking generals.
General How: (lifting his forehead from the floor) We searched Long Feng's office. I think we found something that will interest everybody. (the heroes look to each other)

(Cut to show a guardsman carrying a small ornate chest. General How, the Earth King and the heroes are gathered around a desk in Long Feng's private study. The guardsman slides the box across the desk to the Earth King, then departs.)

General How: There are secret files on everyone in Ba Sing Se. Including you kids. (the King opens the chest)
Aang: Secret files?
Earth King: (reading the address on a rolled up scroll) Toph Bei Fong. (the scroll is handed across to Toph, who hands it to Katara)
Katara: (unrolling and reading) It's a letter from your mom. You mom's here in the city, and she wants to see you. (Toph's face lights up in surprise)
Toph: (disgusted) Long Feng intercepted our letters from home? That's just sad.
Earth King: (handing another to the Avatar) Aang.
General How: This scroll was attached to the horn of your bison when the Dai Li captured it.
Aang: (reading) It's from the Eastern Air Temple.
Katara: (hopefully) Is there a letter for me and Sokka by any chance?
Earth King: I'm afraid not.
Sokka: (both siblings exchange sorrowful looks) Oh.
General How: But there is an intelligence report that might interest you. (hands another scroll to Katara)
Katara: (reading) A small fleet of water tribe ships...
Sokka: (eagerly) What? That could be Dad.
Katara: (in rising excitement) Protecting the mouth of Chameleon Bay, led by Hakoda. It is Dad!

(Cut to the night-time exterior of the apartments. Inside, Iroh is pouring hot tea into a stoneware cup.)

Iroh: You should know this is not a natural sickness. But that shouldn't stop you from enjoying tea. (supports Zuko's head as he drinks)
Zuko: (disorientated) What? What's happening?
Iroh: You're critical decision, what you did beneath that lake...it was in such conflict with your image of yourself, that you are now at war within your own mind and body. (Zuko takes a second sip of the tea)
Zuko: What's that mean (collapses in a fit of coughing)
Iroh: You're going through a metamorphosis, my nephew. It will not be a pleasant experience, but when you come out of it, you will be the beautiful Prince you were always meant to be. (mops Zuko's forehead with the damp cloth, as the camera draws back from their window)

(Aang, Sokka, Toph and Katara sit in a circle on a rug inside Long Feng's office.)

Aang: (reading his scroll) I can't believe it. There's a man living at the Eastern Air Temple. He says he's a Guru. (Momo seems to study the scroll beside him)
Sokka: What's a Guru? Some kind of poisonous blowfish? (scratches the back of his head)
Aang: (eagerly) No, a spiritual expert. He wants to help me take the next step in the Avatar journey. He says he can teach me to control the Avatar State.
Katara: (happily) And I can't believe we know where our Dad is now. (holds the report)
Toph: (reassured) I know what you mean. My Mom's in the city, and from her letter it sounds like she finally understands me.
Sokka: This is all such big news. Where do we even start?
Katara: I hate to say it, but...we have to split up.
Aang: (distraught) Split up? We just found Appa and got the family back together. Now you want us to separate?
Katara: (firmly) You have to meet this Guru, Aang. If we're gonna invade the Fire Nation, you need to be ready.
Aang: (smiling) Well, if I'm going to the Eastern Air Temple. Appa and I can drop you at Chameleon Bay to see your Dad.
Sokka: (resigned) Someone has to stay here with the Earth King and help him plan for the invasion. I guess that's me? (rises to his feet with a glum expression)
Katara: (rises) No Sokka, I know how badly you want to help Dad. You go to Chameleon Bay, I'll stay here with the king.
Sokka: (tears welling in his eyes) You are...the nicest... sister...ever. (does a strange little happy dance, throws his arms around her and kisses her cheek)
Katara: (pushes him back) Easy there, big brother. (pleased) Though you're right, I am.

(Cut to the next morning, the plaza at the foot of the palace. The Earth King is descending the great stair, to where the heroes are gathered around Appa. Katara is pressing affectionately against Appa's flank. Aang looks hesitant, then turns to speak to her.)

Aang: (softly) Katara, I need to tell you something. I've been wanting to say it for a long time. (blushes and looks down)
Katara: (curiously) What is it Aang?
Aang: (hesitantly, still blushing) Katara, I...
Sokka: (abruptly interrupts, throwing Aang in a headlock) Alright! Who's ready to get going on our little men-only man trip (gives Aang a head-noogie, as Katara wears a incredulous expression)
Earth King: (approaching) Aang and Sokka, I wish you good journey. (they wheel about, Aang still in the headlock) Ba Sing Se owes you its thanks, and we look forward to your return. (Sokka releases him, and all three of them bow respectfully to the King)
Guard: Your Majesty. There are three female warriors here to see you, they're from the island of Kyoshi.
Sokka: (shocked) That's Suki!! (freezing while climbing Appa's side, he slips and falls to the stone plaza, sits up, and begins rubbing his sore back)
Earth King: You know these warriors?
Sokka: ( rising, speaking confidently) Oh yeah. The Kyoshi warriors are a skilled group of fighters, trust worthy too. They're good friends of ours.
Earth King: (satisfied) Then we shall welcome them as honored guests.
Katara: (turning to the departing Avatar) Wait, Aang.

(She throws her arms around him, much to his surprise. She kisses his cheek, causing Aang to blush furiously.)

Toph: (quietly) I'm really gonna miss you guys.
Katara: Me too.
Aang: Yeah.

(Katara and Aang throw their arms around her lovingly, while Sokka stands apart, arms folded. He peeks up just in as they swarm him around him, catching him in a group hug.)

Sokka: (embarrassed)Ahhh! Great! That's enough! Ok, we love each other. (pats Katara and Aang's head) Seriously.

(Appa soars away from the palace, bearing Sokka and Aang. We cut to show Zuko sleeping inside his apartment. Rising wearily, he leaves bed walking past the sleeping Iroh. He slides open a door into a small washroom, and splashes water from a basin over his face. He looks up into the mirror. The prince is startled to see his reflection mimics that of the Avatar. It is without his scar, completely bald, and bears the blue arrow tattoo. With a cry, he suddenly starts from his sleep.)

Zuko: Ahhhh! (sitting up in a jolt, he breathes heavily, eyes wide)

(Zuko places his fingers around his left eye. He closes them as he realizes his still bears his terribly scar.

Cut to the skies over the barrens, as Appa flies among the low clouds. Aang sits on his neck as Sokka reclines comfortably on Appa's back.)

Sokka: (smugly) You see Aang, a little positive thinking works wonders. We got the King on our side, we got Long Feng arrested, and when we get back, Suki's waiting for me.
Aang: (love-struck) Yeah, girls are waiting for us. Thanks "positive attitude".
Sokka: (cheerfully) Everything's gonna work out perfectly, from now on and forever. (Aang turns and shares his smile)

(Cut to the gloom of the Earth Kingdom prison, the walls and cell doors clad in steel. Inside one of the cells, Long Feng sits dejectedly. The face of a Dai Li agent appears at the barred window of the cell door, and a tray of food is slid through the gap beneath it.)

Dai Li Agent: Dinner. (in a low voice) The Council of Five and the military are loyal to the Earth King, but the Dai Li remains loyal to you, Long Feng, sir. (walks away)

(Long Feng looks up from his food to smile eagerly, then takes a satisfied bite from a large rice ball, his eyes brimming with cunning.

Cut to a beautiful house in the upper ring of Ba Sing Se. Toph hesitates at the front door, takes a deep breath and exhales nervously. Stepping up to the door, she raps lightly on it, and the unlocked door opens slightly. She steeps into the unlit room, which is bare of furnishings.)

Toph: Hello? Mom? Anyone home?

(She walks into the center of the large empty room with a look of confusion, which is replaced by one of suspicion. She readies herself for trouble just as a large steel trap descends from the ceiling. She gives a shriek of surprise as it snaps her up, enclosing her in a metal box)

Toph: (frightened) Hey! Who do you think you're dealing with?! (outside, two figures drop down from above)
Xin Fu: One loud mouth little brat who strayed too far from home. (Xin Fu and Master Yu stride out of the shadows toward the trap)

(Cut to an exterior view of the Earth King's palace, panning down to show two lines of soldiers creating a path towards a platform. Three Kyoshi warriors walk past the troops toward the Earth King. As they approach him he begins to address them.)

Earth King: (formally) In our hour of need, it is with the highest honor that I welcome our esteemed allies, the Kyoshi warriors.

(All three drop to hands and knees, pressing their heads to the ground. When he finishes, they raise their heads, and we can see that "Suki" is none other than Azula in disguise. She is flanked by Ty Lee and Mai, similarly dressed in the garb of the Kyoshi warriors.)

Azula: (her voice is steady, her eyes cool and deadly) We are the Earth King's humble servants.

(Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence includes clips from "Appa's Lost Days", "The Avatar State", and "The Earth King".]



Act I

(The scene opens upon a beautiful multi-story residential complex in the inner ring. The camera pans up the splendid structure to the third floor, then inside where we see Iroh cooking at a stove. Their pleasant apartment is a vast improvement over the tenement in the lower ring. Zuko, still groggy from sleep, enters the scene from another room.)

Zuko: What's that smell? (Iroh is seen stirring a thick white paste in a steaming pot.)
Iroh: (doubtfully) It's jook. I'm sure you wouldn't like it. (Zuko bows over the pot, inhaling, as Iroh steps back.)
Zuko: (pleasantly) Actually, it smells delicious. I'd love a bowl, Uncle. (The banished Prince picks up and holds out a bowl.)
Iroh: (suspicious) Now that your fever is gone, you seem different somehow. (Iroh ladles some jook into the proffered bowl.)
Zuko: (optimistically) It's a new day. We've got a new apartment, new furniture, and today's the grand opening of your new tea shop. Things are looking up Uncle.

(Zuko moves to the table and kneels as he speaks, sipping from the bowl and looking out an open window. Iroh's concerned look melts into a pleased smile at his nephew's new attitude.

Cut to show Appa soaring in for a landing on a seaside cliff. In the distance four large, blue-sailed Northern Water Tribe ships can be seen in Chameleon Bay. Near the docked vessels sits an encampment of blue tents. Aang is shown seated on Appa's neck.)

Aang: (enthusiastically) You haven't seen your Dad in over two years. You must be so excited.
Sokka: (visibly nauseous) I know I should be, but I just feel sick to my stomach.

(Sokka clutches his gurgling belly.)

Aang: (reassuringly) Don't be nervous, he's going to be so happy to see you. (places arm on Sokka's shoulder, causing him to smile slightly)
Sokka: So what about you? Are you nervous to meet this Guru?
Aang:(confidently) Not at all. I'm ready to master the Avatar State. I'll do whatever it takes. (Sokka drops off of Appa's back, looks up at Aang) See you in a week. Yip Yip!

(With that, Appa launches off the cliff into the air. Sokka turns and looks out over the camp below, and lets out a resigned sigh before heading off for it. We see Sokka nervously walking into the encampment. Water Tribe warriors who were engaged in various activities turn to regard Sokka with a pleasant, surprised look. Sokka is intercepted in the middle of the camp by a tall warrior. The regard each other for a moment, then clasp arms in greeting, broad smiles on their faces. The other men gather around them, laughing with delight.)

Water Tribe Warrior: Sokka, good to see you.

(Another of the tribesmen pushes on the top of Sokka's head in a friendly fashion, scrunching him down like a small boy. Sokka straightens to show his height with a grin. The tribesman compares their stature with his hand, and is amazed that Sokka is nearly as tall as he is. The smiling men stand aside to reveal the tent at the head of the encampment, which bears the symbol of the Northern Water Tribe. Sokka strides toward the command tent, his eyes filled with emotion. He parts the flaps of the tent to reveal a group of senior tribesmen sitting around a chart of the world. At the end of the tent his father Hakoda sits, pondering the map. As the flaps close behind him, Sokka's tentative expression changes to a small smile. A warrior bearing burn scars on his arm and chest kneels next to Hakoda, returning Sokka's smile. Hakoda is preoccupied with the map, frowning in concentration until the warrior nudges him with an elbow. He finally looks up, shocked then elated to see his son.)

Hakoda: Sokka.
Sokka: (voice thick with emotion) Hi Dad.

(Hakoda rises and crosses the tent, and father and son embrace. Sokka rests his head on his father's shoulder with a blissful look of happiness.

Cut to the grandiose throne room of the Earth King. The King is seated on his golden throne. His bear Bosco rests his chin on one of the throne's arms. Azula, Ty Lee and Mai are kneeling at the foot of the dais, still disguised as the Kyoshi warriors.)

Earth King: Look Bosco, the Kyoshi Warriors are here to protect us. Aren't you excited?

(tugs playfully on Bosco's cheeks, who yawns)

Earth King: (turning serious) It's been a difficult week for me. My most trusted advisor, Long Feng, and his Dai Li agents tried to take control of Ba Sing Se from me.
Azula: (smoothly) It's terrible when you can't trust the people who are closest to you.
Earth King: (stroking Bosco's head) But there is good news. As we speak, the Council of Five is meeting to plan an invasion of The Fire Nation this summer. On the day of a solar eclipse.

(Azula's eyes widen slightly at these last words.)

Azula: (feigning enthusiasm) Really? Now that sounds like a fascinating and brilliant plan.

(The three girls exchange glances.

Cut to the military headquarters of Ba Sing Se. On the top floor, an enormous open chamber serves as the war room. The center of the ornate room is dominated by a map of the known world, perhaps sixty feet to a side. Katara kneels at the raised frame of the map, Momo perched on her shoulder. The Council of Five are seated at a long table overlooking it.)

General How: General Fong's base will serve as the launching point of the attack. (a closer view reveals colored stone markers representing military units) In exactly two months, the Army and Navy will invade the Fire Nation on The Day of Black Sun.

(As he says this, he earthbends three earth unit markers across the sea to the fire nation capitol, where a red marker stands. Momo suddenly pounces on the fire nation maker, scattering the other pieces.)

Katara: (amused) Or we could send in Momo to do some damage.

(Momo continues to hop around the map, scattering more pieces)

Katara:(laughing) Cause the... (continues to laugh, then notices the grim expressions of the Council)...sorry.

(With a gesture, General How snaps the pieces upright. A startled Momo shrieks and races off the map, to perch on Katara's shoulder once more.)

General How: All we need is the Earth King's seal in order to execute the plan. (places a scroll on a section of the map frame, which he bends across the map to Katara)
Katara: (respectfully) I'll get these scrolls to him right away. Thank you, General How.

(She picks up the scroll, rises and bows slightly, and turns to depart.

Cut to Appa, flying towards us from the direction of the setting sun, past mist shrouded mountain peaks. From his seat on Appa, Aang looks about in wonder, and perhaps nostalgia. Ahead we see the three mountain spires of the Eastern Air Temple, linked by bridges. Aang peers ahead as Appa soars closer to the temple, and we see the Guru Pathik seated in the lotus position upon a round dias. Momo settles in for a landing at its base. Sitting on Appa's large shaggy head, Aang looks up towards the Guru.)

Aang: (uncertainly) Um, hello? (hops down, starts up stairs) You're Guru Pathik, right? The person who attached the note to Appa's horn?
Guru Pathik: Indeed. I was a spiritual brother of your people, and a personal friend of Monk Gyatso.
Aang:(sits facing the Guru) In your note, you said you could teach me to gain control of the Avatar State. How?
Guru Pathik: (serenely) You must gain balance within yourself before you can bring balance to the world. And the first step to gaining balance begins with this. (holds up a wooden cup with a yellow liquid in it) Drink up!

(Aang tentatively takes a swallow of the thick yellow stuff, and reacts with disgust, spitting it out to his left.)

Aang: (appalled) Ugh! It tastes like onion and banana juice!
Guru Pathik: That's because it is. (Pathik empties another bowl, and holds it over his head like a ridiculous hat) Yum yum!

(Aang gapes at him in stunned disbelief.

Cut to a road in the rocky, forested lands of the Earth Kingdom. An ostrich-horse drawn wagon comes to a fork in the road, and continues on the main left branch. Xin Fu is driving the wagon, Master Yu riding beside him. They have a large metal box chained and loaded in the back.)

Master Yu: (insistently) I believe we need to go right! (points that direction)
Xin Fu: (stops the wagon) What are you talking about? The Bei Fong Estate's this way.
Master Yu: I'm quite certain you're mistaken. (both turn to the sound of loud banging from the box)
Toph: (urgently shouting) Hey! Can you two old ladies quit your bickering for a second? I gotta go to the bathroom! (she is seen standing inside the dark box)
Master Yu: (hesitantly) Oh. Okay, but make it quick.

(Yu takes out key and prepares to head to the back.)

Xin Fu: (grabbing Yu's arm) What's wrong with you!
Master Yu: Oh very sneaky Toph! Nice try, but you can't trick me. (tosses key in his palm, resumes seat)
Toph: (furious) Let me out of here, so I can kick both your butts! (bangs on walls)
Xin Fu: (angrily) Quit your banging. (strikes the side of box) You might think you're the greatest earthbender in the world, but even you can't bend metal.

(Xin Fu cracks the reins, starting the wagon off again. Inside the metal box, Toph looks worried. She lays her palm against one of the metal seams of her prison.

Cut to a small building in the upper ring, at night. Inside, a smiling Ty Lee is looking in a mirror. She is wiping the last traces of her Kyoshi makeup from her face. Mai is seated next to nearby, still working on her own face. Azula paces the floor behind them.)

Azula: We have been presented with an extraordinary opportunity, girls.
Ty Lee: (teasingly) Mai finally gets to wear makeup that's not totally depressing?
Mai: (deadpan) Ha. Ha. (she has large, dark splotches of makeup beneath her eyes)
Azula: (walking to a window) I'm talking about conquering the whole Earth Kingdom. (the two girls turn with shocked looks)
Azula:(staring out the window) For a hundred years the fire nation has hammered away at Ba Sing Se from the outside. But now we are on the inside, and we can take it by ourselves.
Ty Lee: (admiringly) Gosh, you're so confident. I really admire that about you.
Azula: From the inside we're in the perfect position to organize a coup and overthrow the Earth King. The key is the Dai Li. Whoever controls the Dai Li, controls Ba Sing Se.

(She turns and smiles wickedly at her friends.

We now see the star-filled skies above the Eastern Air Temple. The camera pans down into a deep rocky crevasse. Aang and Guru Pathik stand at a steam that winds through the rocks at the base of the gulch.)

Guru Pathik: In order to master the Avatar State, you must open all of the chakras. Aang, tell me everything you know about chakras.
Aang: (rubbing an eye) What are chakras?
Guru Pathik: (disappointed) Oh, I see. I guess we'll start with the basics (he urns to a murky pool where the creek water has gathered.) The water flows through this creek much like the energy flows through your body. (stirs the pool with a stick) As you see there are several pools where the water swirls around before flowing on. These pools are like our charkas.
Aang: So chakras are pools of spiraling energy in our bodies?
Guru Pathik: (pleased) Exactly! If nothing else were around, this creek would flow pure and clear. However, life is messy, and things tend to fall in the creek, and then what happens?
Aang: The creek can't flow?
Guru Pathik: (nods) Yes. But if we open the paths between the pools... (clears some moss clogging the water with his stick. The water pours quickly into the next pool, and soon all of them are running clean and clear.)
Aang: (eagerly) The energy flows!

(Pathik looks to Aang with a satisfied smile.

The scene changes to a dark misty cavern beneath the air temple. Deep inside, Aang and Guru Pathik sit in the lotus position, facing one another.)

Guru Pathik: There are seven chakras that go up the body. Each pool of energy has a purpose, and can be blocked by a specific kind of emotional muck. Be warned...opening the chakras is an intense experience, and once you begin the process, you cannot stop until all seven are open. Are you ready?
Aang: (pauses momentarily) I'll do whatever it takes.
Guru Pathik: First we will open the Earth chakra, located at the base of the spine. It deals with survival and is blocked by fear.

(We see inside Aang's mind, which shows a red-lit image of the Blue Spirit mask, then the Blue Spirit himself, holding swords to Aang's throat.)

Guru Pathik: (in voice-over) What are you most afraid of? Let your fears become clear to you.

(Further scenes show Katara being swallowed into the ground, Aang raging in the avatar state, Sozin's comet, Aang and the Ocean spirit smashing the fleet and Ozai. Grimacing with concentration, Aang opens his eyes to find himself surrounded by flames, the menacing form of Ozai looming behind them.)

Aang: (recoiling in terror) Ahhhhh!

(Fade to black for commercial break.)



Act II

(Opens to the same scene, with Aang cringing in fear from Ozai. He cries out in terror, and closes his eyes once more.)

Guru Pathik: (voice-over) Aang, your vision is not real. You are concerned for your survival, but you must surrender those fears. (we see both of them inside the cave, Aang recoiling from his visions) Let your fears flow down the creek.

(Aang slowly straightens and relaxes. In his mind, he calmly sits within the ring of flame, facing Ozai. The flames swirl and coalesce around the Fire Lord, then both vanish. Now only Aang and Pathik remain in the cavern.)

Guru Pathik:You have opened your Earth chakra. (a sweating Aang wipes his face in relief, then smiles)

(Cut to a rushing waterfall. Behind the massive curtain of surging water, Aang and Guru Pathik sit once again.)

Guru Pathik: Next is the...
Aang: Water chakra?
Guru Pathik: (enthusiastically) Brilliant! Maybe one day you will be a Guru too. This chakra deals with pleasure, and is blocked by guilt. Now, look at all the guilt which burdens you so. What do you blame yourself for?

(Once more, we peer into Aang's thoughts. We see him leaving a note before fleeing the Northern Air Temple, a century ago.)

Aang:(voice-over) I ran away.

(Aang is shown in the avatar state, riding a tornado of wind. In a rage, he lashes out at the soldiers in the Earth Kingdom fortress. Then we see Aang sitting once more behind the waterfall, eyes closed in concentration.)

Aang: (sadly) I hurt all of those people.
Guru Pathik: Accept the reality that these things happened, but do not let them cloud and poison your energy. If you are to be a positive influence on the world, you need to forgive yourself.

(Eyes closed, Aang draws a deep breath, then exhales.

Cut to an aerial view of Chameleon Bay. As Hakoda speaks in voice-over, we see the Northern Water Tribe busily working inside their camp. They are assembling spherical devices, and loading them onto their ships.)

Hakoda: This bay leads directly to the outskirts of Ba Sing Se. We've been using these tangle mines to stop the fire nation ships from getting through.
Bato: Your father invented tangle mines himself. (pours liquid into the cap of the spherical mine)
Sokka: Destructive, buoyant, and (takes a smell of the cap, recoils in disgust) terrible smelling.
Hakoda: Very perceptive. The mines are filled with skunk-fish and seaweed. (affixes the plug onto the cap, and trims the sealant from the edges) When a ship detonates the mine, the seaweed tangles up the propeller, and the foul smell forces people to abandon the ship. I call it the stink-n-sink.
Sokka: (laughing hysterically) Ha ha! Good one Dad!
Bato: (rolling his eyes) You are definitely your father's son.
Water Tribe Soldier:(urgently) Hakoda, our scouts have spotted four fire nation ships. (the other tribesmen gather round)
Hakoda: Bato, get these mines loaded up. The rest of you men, prepare for battle! (the warriors rush off, as Sokka sits and watches them leave)
Sokka: (uncertain) Uh, what should I do, Dad?
Hakoda: Aren't you listening? I said the rest of you men get ready for battle.

(Sokka is shocked for a moment, then rises, grins and runs off to join the others. As he rushes off, his father watches him with a proud smile.

Cut to an impressive tea-shop in the upper ring of Ba Sing Se. Short stairs lead up to it past a bubbling fountain. Inside the opulent building, Iroh and Zuko stand side by side, overseeing the operation.)

Iroh: Who thought when we came to this city as refugees, that I'd end up owning my own tea shop. Follow your passion Zuko, and life will reward you.
Zuko: (cheerfully) Congratulations Uncle.
Iroh: (smiling) I'm very thankful.
Zuko: (confidently) You deserve it. The Jasmine Dragon will be the best tea shop in the city.
Iroh: No, I'm thankful because you decided to share this special day with me. (puts a hand on Zuko's arm) It means more than you know. (Zuko gives him a warm hug, to his surprise)
Zuko: (enthusiastically) Now let's make these people some tea.
Iroh: (eagerly) Yes! Let's make some tea!

(Cut to the fog shrouded peaks near the Easter Air Temple. The mists are lit by a golden light as the sun rises above the mountains. We see Aang and the Guru sitting side by side on a narrow ledge above the mists.)

Guru Pathik: Third is the Fire chakra, located in the stomach.
Aang: (holding his stomach) My Fire chakra would like to eat something other than onion-banana juice.
Guru Pathik: (chuckling) He he. Good one. (serious) Moving on. This chakra deals with will power and is blocked by shame. What are you ashamed of? What are your biggest disappointments in yourself?

(Inside Aang's mind, we see him playing with firebending. His flames erupt outward, accidentally burning Katara. In the real world, his closed eyes wince at the memory.)

Aang: (softly) I'm never going to fire bend again. I can't.
Guru Pathik: You will never find balance if you deny this part of your life. You are the Avatar, and therefore, you are a firebender.

(Aang draws and releases a deep breath.)

Guru Pathik:Hmm, that chakra opened less like a flowing creek, and more like a burping bison.
Aang: (belching loudly) Urrp! Tastes like onion and bananas, but strangely something else. Pickles?

(Guru Pathik shrugs.

Cut to the tall stairs of the Earth Palace. A pair of Dai Li silently slide down the back of the two closest pillars. Mai sits at the top of the stairs in Kyoshi disguise. Nearby, Ty Lee is doing toe-touches in similar garb.)

Mai: (morosely) I'm tired of wearing this girly disguise. I don't know how anyone can fight in this.
Ty Lee: Maybe that's why it was so easy to beat the Kyoshi Warriors and take their clothes. (The hidden Dai Li listen intently)
Mai: How much longer do we have to serve the Earth King? If I have to clean up one more pile of bear poop, I'm gonna throw up.
Ty Lee: (stretching) Princess Azula promised we would go back to the Fire Nation as soon as we captured the Avatar. We just have to be patient.
Mai: (anxious) Shush up! Do you want the whole palace to know we're Fire Nation? (stands to face Ty Lee)
Ty Lee: Sorry.

(The Dai Li retreat back up the pillars. As they depart, Azula enters the scene, also in disguise. She walks up to the two of them.)

Azula: Good work girls. (glances up toward the roof) I am sure the Dai Li will deliver the message.

(Cut to a partially destroyed shrine high in the eastern mountains. Guru Pathik and Aang sit facing each other on the floor of the broken building.)

Guru Pathik: The fourth chakra is located in the heart. It deals with love, and is blocked by grief. (A smiling Aang glances at the statue of an Air Nun, and grows somber) Lay all your grief out in front of you.

(Aang places his fingers over his heart, and closes his eyes in concentration. In his mindscape, he sits surrounded by a thick fog. An emerald light casts everything in a bright shade of green. Opening his eyes to this vision, Aang sees Gyatso rise from the mist, to sit across from him. He is joined by one Air Nomad after another. Eventually a vast field of them sit arrayed behind Monk Gyatso. Aang smiles at them, and one by one they are enveloped in a whirling cloud. As they disappear, Ang is pulled backwards from the cloud an invisible force. Guru Pathik's voice is heard.)

Guru Pathik: (voice-over) You have indeed felt a great loss. But love is a form of energy, and it swirls all around us. (The air nomads can now be seen floating above the cloud, as Aang reaches out to them. The cloud envelops him and lifts him up.) The Air Nomads love for you has not left this world. It is still inside of your heart, and is reborn in the form of new love.

(The cloud takes the form of Katara's face, which is replaced by a vision of her smiling face. In the real world, tears stream from Aang's closed eyes. We return fully to the real world as he wipes away the tears.)

Guru Pathik:Let the pain flow away. Very good.
Aang: (voice thick with emotion) Can I have some onion banana juice please?

(Cut to the serene face of a massive stone statue. It portrays an Air Nomad nun, sitting cross legged. As the camera pans down, we see Aang and the Guru sitting at the foot of the statue, dwarfed by its enormous mass.)

Guru Pathik: The fifth in the chain is the Sound chakra, located in the throat. It deals with truth, and is blocked by lies. The ones we tell ourselves.

(Aang sits in meditation. In his mind, we see Katara and Sokka sitting in Appa's saddle.)

Katara: Why didn't you tell us you were the Avatar? (The scene shifts back to the sitting Aang)
Aang: Because I never wanted to be.
Guru Pathik: You cannot lie about your own nature. You must accept that you are the Avatar.

(Aang draws and releases a deep breath, once more closing his eyes. In his mind, he is standing on a high peak, looking out over the land. As the wind blows his clothing, he gazes down with steely determination. We return to the real world, as Aang opens his eyes with a smile.)

Guru Pathik: Very good Aang. You have opened the chakra of Truth.

(In the next scene, Aang and Pathik sit on a narrow rising stair high in the mountains, overlooking the misty peaks below. The sun has risen higher in the sky, and casts a golden glow over everything.)

Guru Pathik: The sixth pool of energy is the Light chakra, located in the center of the forehead. It deals with insight and is blocked by illusion. The greatest illusion of this world is the illusion of separation. Things you think are separate and different are actually one and the same.
Aang: Like the four nations.

(We see a map of the world, with the various nations represented in different colors. The map shines brightly, and all the lands are the same color. They shine once more, and return to their separate colors, as Pathik continues to speak.)

Guru Pathik: Yes. We are all one people, but we live as if divided.
Aang: We're all connected. (opens his eyes) Everything is connected.
Guru Pathik: That's right. Even the separation of the four elements is an illusion.

(The camera pans down the mountainside, then the scene changes. We see the wagon carrying the imprisoned Toph traveling along a forest road.)

Guru Pathik: If you open your mind, you will see that all the elements are one. Four parts of the same whole. Even metal is just a part of Earth, that has been purified and refined.

(As Pathik speaks, we see Toph standing inside her metal prison. In a calm stance, she is repeatedly striking the metal walls, sending out ripples of vibrations. Striking ahead, the vibrations reveal shimmering impurities within the walls. Toph smiles and breathes deeply. She stomps her foot and strikes the wall with her hands once more.)

Toph: (straining) Come on metal.... budge.

(From outside, we see her next blow put a large dent in the wall. Inside Toph seems amazed at her achievement.)

Toph: Whoo! Toph, you rule! (does a double fisted strike at the wall)

(Cut to the Jasmine Dragon Tea House, as guests stream inside its open doors. Katara and Momo walk onto the tea shop lot.)

Katara: What do you say Momo? A cup of tea before we get back to the king? (steps inside the entrance) Table for two please.
Zuko: Uncle, I need two jasmine, one green and one lychee!

(Katara looks toward the sound of a familiar voice, and sees Zuko in a fancy waiters uniform, speaking to Iroh, who is working behind a counter.)

Iroh: (smiling) I'm brewing as fast as I can!

(Katara stands in shock as she recognizes them both. She turns and flees as fast as she can down the front steps of the tea shop, and races off-screen. Fade to black.)



Act III

(Scene opens atop the tallest spire of the Easter Air Temple. The skies have darkened over the misty mountains far below this lofty, flat-topped tower. Aang and Guru Pathik are once more seated across from each other, atop the tower. The sky above them is filled with bright stars.)

Aang: This is the last chakra isn't it?
Guru Pathik: Yes. Once you open this chakra, you will be able go in and out of the Avatar State at will. And when you are in the Avatar State, you will have complete control and awareness of all your actions.
Aang: (confident) Let's do this.
Guru Pathik: The Thought chakra is located at the crown of the head. It deals with pure cosmic energy and is blocked by earthly attachment. Meditate on what attaches you to this world.

(In Aang's mind, we see Katara practicing graceful waterbending moves, then leaning against a tree in an alluring pose. As Pathik begins to speak again, she is sitting face to face with Aang. Their lips move closer, mimicking the scene from the Cave of Two Lovers.)

Guru Pathik: Now, let all of those attachments go. Let them flow down the river. Forgotten.

(At these final words, Aang is abruptly drawn from his vision.)

Aang: (startled) What? Why would I let go of Katara? I...I..I love her.
Guru Pathik: (reasonably) Learn to let her go, or you cannot let the pure cosmic energy flow in from the universe.
Aang: (crossly) Why would I choose cosmic energy over Katara? How could it be a bad thing that I feel an attachment to her? Three chakras ago, that was a good thing.
Guru Pathik: (firmly) You must learn to let go.

(Aang lowers his eyes, with a look of uncertainty clearly written on his face.

The scene cuts to Katara, as she races down the long halls of the Earth King's palace, message-scroll in hand. Breathless, she pulls to a stop before the Earth King's throne, where the three "Kyoshi warriors" wait kneeling.)

Katara: Thank goodness you are here, Suki. Something terrible is going on. The Fire Nation has infiltrated the city. I just saw Prince Zuko and his Uncle! (Azula's eyes snap open at this news, and she smiles) We have to tell the Earth King right away!
Azula: (rising to her feet) Oh, don't worry. I'll be sure to let him know.

(Katara stands dumbstruck as she realizes who "Suki" really is, and Momo leaps away with a frightened squeak. Ty Lee rushes forward with a series of acrobatic flips, striking at Katara's shoulder as she flips behind her. Katara, in the midst of bending water from her reserve, falls paralyzed to the throne room floor. She lies helpless in the pool of water, as the three of them gather around her.)

Azula: So, Zuzu's in the city too. I think it's time for a family reunion.

(Momo, observing all this from a tall pillar, leaps away. The scene then shifts to the Air Temple tower, framed against the starlit sky.)

Aang: I'm sorry, but I can't let go of Katara.
Guru Pathik: (calmly) Aang, to master the Avatar State, you must open all the chakras. Surrender yourself.
Aang: (reluctantly) Okay, I'll try.

(Aang focuses his concentration. Inside his mind, we see mountains beneath a starry sky. The heavens begin to spin with great speed, the stars blurring streaks that disappear behind the mountains. An image of Katara appears, and drifts back toward the horizon to finally vanish with a twinkle of light. The heavens cease to whirl.)

Guru Pathik: (voice-over) Now, think of your attachments and let them go.

(An image of Katara appears, and drifts back toward the horizon to finally vanish with a twinkle of light. The sky ceases to spin.)

Guru Pathik:(voice-over) Let the pure cosmic energy flow.

(Looking up into the stars, we see an aurora of light. Aang is seen floating in space above the planet, and the aurora solidifies into a radiant bridge beneath his feet. Turning from the world below, Aang sees a massive entity standing above snaking path. It is a spectral figure of Aang himself, the tattoos and eyes shining with the light of the Avatar State. Aang sets off carefully towards it, mouth open in awe. As he nears the feet of the hovering apparition, his own tattoos begin to shine with light. The towering, spectral Aang descends, a sphere of light shimmering between its fingers. The Avatar is enclosed within this shell, but suddenly he is distracted by a cry of distress. Aang sees a vision of Katara chained to a wall, demanding to be freed. He leaps from the hands of the apparition, and the sphere of light vanishes. Behind him, the great entity fades from sight, as he rushes back down the path. It too begins to fade rapidly, until it drops him to plunge screaming toward the world. Aang suddenly starts from his meditative trance.)

Aang: (rising in alarm) Katara is in danger! I have to go.

(Aang turns and races away, sliding down the roof the tower)

Guru Pathik: (calling after him) No Aang! By choosing attachment, you have locked the chakra! (Aang draws to a stop) If you leave now you won't be able to go into the Avatar State at all!

(Aang pauses for a moment at the edge of the roof, then leaps down. Guru Pathik closes his eyes with a mournful expression. Aang is show riding Appa away from the temple at great speed.

The next scene shows wagon bearing the imprisoned Toph rolling through the dark forest. A loud clang rings out from the metal box, and Xin Fu draws the wagon to a halt. Both he and Master Yu disembark from the wagon and head to the rear. They find that the back of the prison has been torn open, and lies empty.)

Master Yu: It's another one of her tricks!
Xin Fu: (incensed) There's a giant hole in the box. How's that a trick?
Toph: It's not! It's the real deal!

(Both of the men turn to see Toph standing in the road behind them. With a swift earthbending move, she sandwiches them between two slabs of rock. With a backwards movement, she propels them both into the prison. Leaping toward them, Toph grabs the edges of the bent metal box and bends them together again. She leaps atop the box and raises her arm high.)

Toph:(triumphantly) I am the greatest earthbender in the world! Don't you two dunderheads ever forget it!

(She stomps angrily on the metal box, then leaps down to the road. The ground beneath her plunges downward in a wide circle, then surges her up atop a swell of earth. With the running motion of her feet, Toph rides this swell back up the road at tremendous speed, leaving a cloud of dust behind. The shot changes to show the metal prison, now resealed. Xin Fu is shown inside, with Master Yu tightly pressed in behind him.)

Xin Fu: (dolefully) I'm going to be stuck in here forever with you, aren't I?
Master Yu: (pathetically) I have to go to the bathroom.

(Xin Fu strikes his head against the metal wall in despair.

Nighttime at Chameleon Bay. Sokka sheathes his machete, and picks up his war club. His father approaches, as the warriors finish loading the ships.)

Hakoda: Ready to go knock some Fire Nation heads?
Sokka: (earnestly) You don't know how much this means to me dad. I'll make you proud, and I'll finally prove to you what a great warrior I am.
Hakoda: (reassuringly) Sokka, you don't have to prove anything to me. (places a hand on his shoulder) I'm already proud of you, and I've always known you were a great warrior.
Sokka: Really?
Hakoda: Why do you think I trusted you to look after our tribe when I left?

(Sokka and Hakoda head off to the ships. They are climbing the ramp to embark when they hear Appa's rumbling grunt, and turn. Appa sets down at the foot of the ramp, and Aang turns to Sokka with a worried expression.)

Sokka: (apprehensively) This can't be good news.

(Appa soars away from Chameleon Bay, Aang and Sokka atop him. Looking back, Sokka watches his father's ships head out of the bay toward open waters. From the deck of his flagship, Hakoda looks back and smiles toward his son.

Scene changes to the steel holding cells of Ba Sing Se. Azula is being escorted by a pair of Dai Li Agents, who hold her arms. She is brought into the cell holding Long Feng.)

Azula: (outraged) What is this about? Your agents show up in the middle of the night and drag me down here? You will not treat a Kyoshi Warrior this way! (struggles against her captors)
Long Feng: (in a sinister voice) But you are not a Kyoshi Warrior, are you? (rises from his bench) Princess Azula of the Fire Nation!
Azula: (stops struggling) What do you want?
Long Feng: I want to make a deal. It's time that I regain control of Ba Sing Se. And you have something I need.
Azula: Oh?
Long Feng: The Earth King's trust.
Azula: (warily) Why should I help you?
Long Feng: Because I can get you the Avatar.
Azula: I'm listening. (both smile wickedly)

(Inside the Jasmine Dragon, Zuko is sweeping up for the evening. As Iroh clears a table, a man enters and walks up to him.)

Messenger: A message from the royal palace.

(He bows and hands a scroll to Iroh, who reads it with a look of worry. His eyes widen with astonishment.)

Iroh: (overcome) I...I can't believe it.
Zuko: (walking over) What is it Uncle?
Iroh: (elated) Great news! We've been invited to serve tea to the Earth King!

(Iroh runs off excitedly towards the rear of the tea house. Zuko watches him go with a smile, then resumes sweeping, as the camera draws back out the entrance.

The door closes to Long Feng's cell, leaving him in shadow. Azula is led away by the Dai Li, head low. As she approaches closer, her eyes open, and she smiles cruelly. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence includes clips from "The Guru".]



Act I

(The scene opens with an ostrich horse drinking from a small creek. The outer wall of Ba Sing Se can be seen in the distance. The ostrich horse looks up as Appa flies overhead towards the city.)

Sokka: So, what kind of trouble is Katara in?
Aang: (worried) I don't know. In my vision, I just knew she needed help.
Sokka: It would be nice if your Avatar powers could be just a little more specific from time to time.

(A rumbling noise is heard and Sokka points to the ground.)

Sokka: What is that?!

(Down below, Toph is racing over the hills, leaving a large trail of dust. Aang brings Appa down to her level.)

Sokka: Need a ride?
Toph: Ahhh!

(Toph is startled by Sokka and loses her concentration. The mounds she is earth skating on fall apart and Toph tumbles to the ground. Aang and Sokka watch painfully.)

Aang and Sokka: Oooo!

(Cut to a very large, dark hallway underground. On both sides of it are enormous, ancient statues. In the middle are many Dai Li agents, all lined up in rows. Azula, accompanied by Mai and Ty Lee in their disguises, stands on a statue's pedestal and addresses the Dai Li.)

Azula: The Earth King and The Council of Five do not trust the Dai Li. They imprisoned your leader, Long Feng. Soon they will turn on all of you, and eliminate you. Seizing power today is a matter of life and death. (Cut to a close up of a Dai Li lowering his head in anxiety. Azula steps down from the pedestal and comes closer to the agents.) The coup must be swift and decisive. The Earth King, and each of the five generals, must be taken out simultaneously. Long Feng has placed you in me command while we overthrow the government. (Azula walks toward a Dai Li agent with a scar on his cheek and look him in the eyes.) If I sense any disloyalty, any hesitation, any weakness at all, I will snuff it out. That is all.

(The agent watches Azula nervously as she walks away. The Dai Li turn and all begin walking away. Azula climbs back up the steps as Ty Lee pours her a cup of tea.)

Ty Lee: Nice speech Azula. It was pretty and poetic, but also scary in a good way.
Mai: Yeah, I thought you were gonna make that one guy pee his pants.
Azula: There are still a few loose ends. The Avatar, and my brother and Uncle.

(The scene fades to a shot of Zuko and Iroh standing in front of a carriage just outside the royal palace. Iroh is holding a white, ornate box containing his tea set. They both make their way towards the entrance.)

Iroh: Many times, I imagined myself here, at the threshold of the palace. But I always thought I would be here as a conqueror...instead, we are the Earth Kings personal guests, here to serve him tea. Destiny is a funny thing.
Zuko: (cheerfully) It sure is Uncle.

(Fade to Appa, Aang, Sokka and Toph flying over the outer wall.)

Toph: So how did it go with the Guru? Did you master the Avatar State?

(Aang groans nervously. Flash back to "The Guru.")

Guru Pathik: If you leave now, you won't be able to go into the Avatar State at all!

(End of flash back.)

Sokka: Aang, are you ok?
Aang: (smiling sheepishly) I'm great. It went great with the Guru. I completely mastered the Avatar State. Heh heh...heh. Yeah.

(Fade to a large, decorated house on the palace grounds, surrounded by shrubbery. Zuko and Iroh are inside, sitting patiently at a table. Before them is a small throne set on a raised platform. Iroh pours a cup of tea as they wait for the Earth King to arrive.)

Zuko: What's taking so long?
Iroh: Maybe the Earth King overslept.

(Several Dai Li agents walk into the room from the right and form a circle around the two tea servers.)

Zuko: Something's not right.

(The camera zooms out from a shot of Zuko and Iroh as Azula enters the room.)

Azula: (mockingly) It's tea time.
Zuko: (standing to his feet) Azula!
Azula: Have you met the Dai Li? They're Earthbenders, but they have a killer instinct that is so Firebender, I just love it!

(Iroh takes the cup he poured and stands up beside Zuko.)

Iroh: Did I ever tell you how I got the nickname the "Dragon of the West"?
Azula: (examining her nails and speaking in a bored tone) I'm not interested in a lengthy anecdote, Uncle.
Iroh: It's more of a demonstration really.

(Iroh takes a sip of his tea. Shift to a close up of Zuko as he looks at his uncle and smirks. Suddenly, Zuko ducks behind Iroh just before the ex general enters a firebending stance, opens his mouth and breathes a powerful torrent of fire at the Dai Li, like a dragon. The agents lower their heads and lift their gloved hands to shield themselves.

Cut to an empty hallway inside the house. Zuko bursts through the wall with a fire blast and runs down the hall, towards the camera. Iroh quickly follows after, still breathing fire at the Dai Li before catching up. Two Dai Li agents come through the hole in the wall and begin firing the small, finger pieces of their rock gloves like bullets with swift thrusts of their hands. The stone bullets barely miss Zuko and Iroh, becoming embedded in the wall.

Cut to a shot of a wall on the outside, second story of the house. A bolt of lightning breaks through the wall, and a moment after, Iroh jumps out, giving a small shout as he falls on top of a hedge bush in the shape of a bear, destroying it. Iroh grunts in pain and puts a hand to his head before looking up and calling to Zuko.)

Iroh: Come on. You'll be fine.
Zuko: No. I'm tired of running. It's time I faced Azula!

(Zuko turns around and walks back towards the Dai Li and Azula. Iroh slaps his head in frustration and makes his escape. Cut to Zuko, who is cornered by Azula and the Dai Li.)

Azula: You're so dramatic. What, are you going to do, challenge me to an Agni Kai?
Zuko: (angry and determined) Yes! I challenge you!
Azula: (smiling mockingly) No thanks.

(Zuko raises both hands, summoning a large ball of flame, leans forward and pushes it at his sister. Azula watches calmly as two Dai Li step between her and the attack and raise a large, rectangular tile from the floor, blocking the fire blast. Both agents fling their stone gloves at Zuko's feet, trapping him to the floor. Zuko stumbles and places a hand on the floor, which is pinned down by another glove. Zuko struggles in vain to pull himself free. Cut to a shot of Azula as she turns her back and walks away. Two more Dai Li agents step forward and shoot their gloves toward the camera.

The scene cuts to Appa flying towards the Earth King's palace. Cut to Aang, Sokka, and Toph in the throne room speaking to the Earth King. Bosco is resting next to the Earth King.)

Earth King: Katara's fine. You have nothing to worry about.
Aang: But, in my vision. I felt so sure that she was in trouble.
Earth King: Well, she met with the Council of Generals to plan the invasion. And since then she's been off with your friends, the Kyoshi Warriors.
Sokka: See Aang? She's with Suki. They're probably back at our apartment right now, talking about make up or something.
Aang: Ok, maybe you're right.
Earth King: Believe me, if there was any danger at all, Bosco's animal instinct would sense it.

(Bosco raises his head, blinking and grunting inquisitively.

Cut to Katara pacing around a cave lit by glowing green crystals. She here's a rumbling noise and looks up towards the steep tunnel leading outside. The stone blocking the entrance is slid away by a Dai Li agent. Another agent appears holding Zuko.)

Dai Li Agent: You've got company.

(The agent throws pushes Zuko forward and he tumbles to the bottom near Katara.)

Katara: (surprised) Zuko!

(Katara's expression quickly turns from amazement to loathing. Zuko gets to his knees and stares back at Katara as the Dai Li seal the entrance.

Shift scenes to the house in the upper ring Aang and his friends have been staying in. The wall that Toph had destroyed is being reconstructed. Appa lands in front of the house and Aang, Sokka and Toph run inside. Upon entry, Momo greets them by chattering excitedly and climbing on Aang's shoulders.)

Aang: Momo!

(The camera pans across the living room. Katara is nowhere to be seen.)

Toph: There's no one else here.
Aang: Katara is in trouble! I knew it!
Sokka: Oh no.
Toph: Wait, someone's at the door. (points back at the door. A moment later, someone knocks on it.) Actually, I know who it is. It's an old friend of mine. (Toph walks to the door and slides it open to reveal Iroh.) Glad to see you're okay.
Iroh: I need your help.
Aang and Sokka: Huh uh !

(Aang, Sokka and Momo go into a state of panic and shock at the sight of their old enemy. Toph smiles and gives Iroh a friendly wave of the hand. The scene cuts to black for a commercial break.)



Act II

(The scene returns to Aang and Sokka gawking at Iroh. Aang points a finger at Iroh.)

Aang: (shocked) You guys know each other!
Toph: I met him in the woods once and knocked him down. Then he gave me tea and very good advice.
Iroh: May I come in? (Toph nods to him and he enters the room.) Princess Azula is here in Ba Sing Se.
Aang: She must have Katara.
Iroh: She has captured my nephew as well.
Aang: Then we'll work together to fight Azula, and save Katara and Zuko.
Sokka: Woah there. You lost me at, "Zuko".
Iroh: I know how you must feel about my nephew. But believe me when I tell you there is good inside him. (places his hands on Sokka's shoulders in a pleading way)
Sokka: Good inside of him isn't enough. Why don't you come back when it's outside him too, okay?

(Sokka removes Iroh's hands and shoves him away.)

Aang: Katara is in trouble. All of Ba Sing Se is in trouble. Working together is our best chance.

(Sokka closes his eyes and nods grudgingly. Aang smiles at Sokka's resolve.)

Iroh: I brought someone along who might be able to help us.

(Iroh heads back outside and the others follow. A bound and gagged Dai Li agent is sitting on the porch. Toph lifts him up by earthbending two stone slabs on either side of him. Iroh pulls down the cloth over his face, showing him to be the same scared agent with the scar at Azula's briefing.)

Scared Dai Li Agent: Azula and Long Feng are plotting a coup. They're going to overthrow the Earth King.
Sokka: (angrily) My sister! Where are they keeping Katara? (points his machete at the Dai Li agent)
Scared Dai Li Agent: In the crystal catacombs of old Ba Sing Se, deep beneath the palace.

(Iroh, Aang, Toph and Sokka quickly depart for the palace. The scene fades to the metal prison cells. Long Feng is meditating in his cell, his eyes closed, while conversing with a Dai Li agent outside.)

Dai Li Agent: The movements of all the generals and the Earth King have been plotted out step by step.
Long Feng: Good. And the Fire Nation Princess is cooperating?
Dai Li Agent: Oh yes! More than cooperating, she's really taken charge. She's terrifying and inspirational all at the same time. It's hard to explain.

(The agent leaves. Long Feng opens his eyes for a moment, full of suspicion. The scene changes to a close up of Zuko sitting in the crystal cave. The camera pans past him and shows Katara pacing behind him.)

Katara: (accusingly) Why did they throw you in here? Oh wait. Let me guess. It's a trap. So when Aang shows up to rescue me, you can finally have him in your little Fire Nation clutches.

(Katara shapes her hands into claws Zuko turns to look at her for a second before turning back and saying nothing.)

Katara: You're a terrible person, you know that? Always following us, hunting the Avatar, trying to capture the world's last hope for peace! But what do you care? You're the Fire Lord's son. Spreading war and violence and hatred is in your blood.
Zuko: You don't know what you're talking about.
Katara: (growing angrier) I don't?! How dare you! You have no idea what this war has put me through. Me personally (turns her back to Zuko and crouches down). The Fire Nation took my mother away from me.

(Katara places a hand on her necklace as tears roll down her cheek and drip off her chin. Zuko turns his head further and looks sadly at her. Katara begins sobbing, holding her head to her chest and burying her head in her knees.)

Zuko: I'm sorry. That's something we have in common.

(Zuko makes a full turn towards Katara, who stops her crying for a moment. She wipes a tear from her face and looks at Zuko, genuinely surprised. The scene cuts to a close up of Toph's hand placed on the ground. The camera turns up to Toph's face.)

Toph: Well whaddya know. There is an ancient city down there, but it's deep.

(Change to a shot of Appa, Aang, Iroh, Momo, Sokka and Toph standing just outside the palace walls. Toph waves her fists outward, earthbending a small crater in the ground.)

Sokka: We should split up. Aang, you go with Iroh to look for Katara and the angry jerk...no offense.
Iroh: None taken.
Sokka: And I'll go with Toph to warn the Earth King about Azula's coup.

(Momo jumps on Sokka's shoulder before the scene fades to Aang and Iroh deep underground. Aang is tunneling down using his earthbending and Iroh is lighting the way with a flame cupped in his hand. There is a moment of uncomfortable silence between the two until Aang decides to break the ice.)

Aang: So, Toph thinks you give pretty good advice. And great tea.
Iroh: The key to both is proper aging. What's on your mind?

(Aang pauses for a second to deepen the tunnel with an earthbending movement before continuing.)

Aang: Well, I met with this Guru who was supposed to help me master the Avatar State, and control this great power. But to do it, I had to let go of someone I love, and I just couldn't.
Iroh: Perfection and power are overrated. I think you were very wise to choose happiness and love.

(They stop again and Aang pushes back the earth with a wave of his arms.)

Aang: What happens if we can't save everyone and beat Azula? Without the Avatar State, what if I am not powerful enough?
Iroh: I don't know the answer. Sometimes life is like this dark tunnel. You can't always see the light at the end of the tunnel, but if you just keep moving...

(They come to one last wall of rocks. Aang pushes both arms forward, earthbending the rocks out of the way. A green light shines through. Cut to a close up of Iroh. He smiles as the flame in his hand extinguishes and the green light washes over him. Aang and Iroh walk forward and enter the crystal catacombs.)

Iroh: You will come to a better place.

(The catacombs are full of glowing green crystals, stalagmites and stalactites. In the back of the area is a waterfall pouring into a channel forming two rectangles around several thick, jagged columns. Change scenes to the palace. Sokka, Toph and Momo are climbing the steep steps towards the entrance.)

Sokka: There's General How!

(Sokka notices the Dai Li agents clinging to the columns supporting the roof, lying in wait as General How walks closer. Sokka grabs Toph and they hide behind one of the columns. As General How draws closer, one of the other agents drops down and slings a shackle at him, attacking to his wrist. Another agent shackles his other wrist. The general growls as they pull the chains, immobilizing his arms. One more Dai Li agent drops in front of General How.)

General How: Arghh! What's going on here?!
Dai Li Agent:You're under house arrest.

(Sokka witnesses General How's capture from behind the pillar. Momo is clinging to Toph's bun.)

Sokka: The coup is happening right now! We've got to warn the Earth King!

(Sokka grabs Toph and they run towards the throne room. Cut to a wood grating with trails of steam rising through it. One of the council of five is strolling down the street. When the general walks over the grating, several chains shoot out from underneath him, ensnaring him and pulling him to the ground. He looks through the grating and sees the Dai Li. Cut to General Sung, who is also taking a walk through the city. Two chains fly out from a dark alley, grab Sung and pull him into the shadows. Cut to two of the council of five studying the large map in the war room. Three Dai Li agents crawl along the ceiling above them. Without being noticed, the agents drop their chains and shackle the generals' ankles. The generals both give a shout as they are swiftly pulled upside down and into the air.

Shift scenes to the Earth King's throne room. The Earth King is sitting in his throne with Bosco by his side. Mai and Ty Lee and there with him, still in their disguises.)

Sokka: Thank goodness we're in time!
The Earth King: In time for what?
Ty Lee: Yeah, what are you in time for... (somersaults forward and lands in front of Sokka, putting her face close to his) cutie?
Sokka: (sweating) Uh, I'm kinda involved with Suki.
Ty Lee: Who?

(Toph earthbends a rock underneath Ty Lee. She gives a small shout as she is hurled into the air. Ty Lee flips backward and lands on top of the badger mole statue in the back of the room.

Toph: They're not the real Kyoshi Warriors!

(The Earth King gasps in shock and the camera pans down to Mai.)

Mai: Sorry to disappoint you.

(Mai flings three double bladed daggers at Toph. Toph earthbends a slab of rock in front of her and blocks the projectiles. She then kicks the slab, sending it flying at Mai, who jumps over it. A moment after she lands, Toph uses her earthbending to pop a stone up from underneath Mai, knocking her away. Toph grins victoriously. Cut to Sokka watching the fight. Ty Lee sneaks up next to him, giggling and with a big, happy grin on her face. Sokka is startled and steps back. Ty Lee proceeds to try to attack Sokka's pressure points in order to disable him, but the Water Tribe warrior is too quick. Every time Ty Lee tries to hit a joint or spot on his body, Sokka ducks, leans, and shifts out of the way, often ending up in an awkward position.)

Ty Lee: Ooo, it's like we're dancing together.

(Cut to Azula standing behind the Earth King and holding him by the shoulder. The frightened king stares at the blue flame Azula holds close to his head.)

Azula:This fight... is over.

(Sokka and Toph raise their hands in surrender. Ty Lee jumps between them and disables them both with a series of strikes. Momo soars through the air and tries to escape, but a Dai Li agent that had entered the throne room with Azula throws his stone gloves at Momo. They wrap around the lemur, and Ty Lee watches as Momo falls next to her. Azula roughly shoves the Earth King away.)

Azula: Get them all out of my sight.

(Mai and Ty Lee drag Toph out of the room, while a Dai Li agent drags Sokka out by the arm and another agent leads the Earth King, who has Bosco on a leash. The bear moans sadly. Cut to a close up of Azula. She smiles evilly before focuses on Long Feng who has just entered the throne room, followed by a troop of the Dai Li, all lined in rows. They all stand before Azula.)

Long Feng: Now comes the part where I double-cross you. Dai Li, arrest the Fire Nation Princess. (The Dai Li do not respond. Long Feng turns to them, frowning, and points at Azula) I said, arrest her. (looks back and forth at the agents and loses his patience) What is wrong with you?!
Azula: It's because they haven't made up their minds. They're waiting to see how this is going to end.
Long Feng: What are you talking about?
Azula: I can see your whole history in your eyes. You were born with nothing. So you had to struggle and connive and claw your way to power. But true power...the divine right to rule...is something you're born with. The fact is, they don't know which one of us is going to be sitting on that throne and which one is going to be bowing down. But I know. And you know. (Long Feng begins to sweat. His face is full of hesitation and uncertainty. Azula sits on the Earth King's throne and crosses her legs.) Well?

(Long Feng is now truly frightened. Beads of sweat roll down his face as his mouth hangs open, speechless. Azula stares at him cold and intently. Long Feng closes his eyes and drops his head, realizing that he has lost. Long Feng steps forward and bows before Azula.)

Long Feng: You've beaten me at my own game.
Azula:Don't flatter yourself. You were never even a player.

(Cut to Katara and Zuko in their underground cell. Katara brings her feet together and looks down shamefully.)

Katara: I'm sorry I yelled at you before.
Zuko: It doesn't matter.
Katara: It's just that for so long now, whenever I would imagine the face of the enemy, it was your face.
Zuko: My face. I see (turns away and places a hand to his scar).
Katara:(regretfully) No, no, that's not what I meant.
Zuko: It's ok. I used to think this scar marked me. The mark of the banished prince, cursed to chase the Avatar forever. But lately, I've realized I'm free to determine my own destiny, even if I'll never be free of my mark.
Katara: Maybe you could be free of it.

(A glimmer of hope flashes in Zuko's eyes as he turns back to Katara.)

Zuko: What?
Katara: I have healing abilities.
Zuko: It's a scar. It can't be healed.

(Katara reaches under her shirt and holds up the water from the spirit oasis at the North Pole, given to her by Master Pakku.)

Katara: This is water from the Spirit Oasis at the North Pole. It has special properties, so I have be saving it forsomething important. (walks up to Zukoand faces him) I don't know if it would work, but...

(Zuko stares at her for a moment before closing his eyes and silently accepting Katara's offer.

Katara places her hand on Zuko's scar and examines it. Before she does anything else, Aang bursts into the tunnel with Iroh.)

Katara:Aang!

(Aang stares at Zuko and Katara, confused by how close they are, before Katara runs up to him and they embrace in a warm hug. Aang glares at Zuko while still holding Katara. Iroh runs up to Zuko and hugs him around the shoulders. Zuko glares back at the Avatar. Cut to a shot of them all in the crystal cave. The camera zooms out before cutting to black for a commercial break.)



Act III

(We return to Zuko, Katara, Aang and Iroh in the cave. Katara places her hands on Aang's shoulders and gives him another hug.)

Katara: Aang, I knew you would come.
Zuko: (upset) Uncle, I don't understand. What are you doing with the Avatar!! (points a finger at Aang)
Aang: Saving you, that's what.

(Zuko snarls at Aang and tries to lunge at him, but Iroh grabs him, preventing him from causing a fight.)

Iroh: Zuko, it's time we talked. (turns to Aang and Katara) Go help your other friends. We'll catch up with you.

(Aang clasps his hands and bows respectfully to Iroh before running back through the hole in the cave. Katara slowly follows after him. She turns her head and takes one last sad glimpse at a sullen Zuko before exiting. Zuko turns his head away from Iroh.)

Zuko: (hurt) Why Uncle?
Iroh: You are not the man you used to be, Zuko. You are stronger and wiser and freer than you have ever been. And now you have come to the crossroads of your destiny. It's time for you to choose. It's time for you to choose good!

(Zuko shuts his eyes, absorbing his uncle's words. Before he can process this wisdom, Zuko is startled by a violent quake. A trail of crystals shoots out of the ground until they reach Iroh, trapping him. Zuko readies himself for an attack. Azula and two Dai Li agents slide down from the tunnel Zuko had entered through. Azula advances towards Zuko until his is directly between his uncle and his sister.)

Azula: I expected this kind of treachery from Uncle, but Zuko, Prince Zuko...you're a lot of things, but you're not a traitor, are you?
Zuko: Release him immediately!
Azula:It's not too late for you Zuko. You can still redeem yourself.
Iroh:The kind of redemption she offers is not for you.
Azula: Why don't you let him decide, Uncle? I need you Zuko. I've plotted every move of this day. This glorious day in Fire Nation history. And the only way we win is together. At the end of this day, you will have your honor back. You will have your father's love. You will have everything you want.
Iroh: Zuko, I am begging you, look into your heart and see what it is that you truly want.

(Zuko looks back at Iroh. He is unsure of whom to listen to. He shuts his eyes and hangs his head, trying to come to a decision.)

Azula: You are free to choose.

(Azula waves a hand to the Dai Li agents, signaling them to leave. Both earthbend a stone cube under their feet and slide back up the ramp. Azula departs through the tunnel Aang and Katara had gone through. Cut to a shot of the unscarred side of Zuko's face, then to a shot of the scarred side, before finally settling on a shot of Zuko from behind. His mind is in turmoil over what actions he should make in his critical moment. Cut to Aang and Katara running through the main part of the catacombs where the waterfall is.)

Katara: We've got to find Sokka and Toph.

(A stream of blue fire rockets towards Aang and Katara from behind. Aang quickly turns around and earthbends a wall of stone to protect them. The fire hits the wall with great force, knocking Aang back. The camera zooms in on Azula, her fingertips still smoking from the attack. Katara runs around the smoldering wall and bends the water in the channel. She charges at Azula and brings the water crashing down on her. Azula deflects the attack with a short blast of fire. Katara keeps her momentum and spins the water around her, smashing it into the floor and creating a large wave. Azula stomps the ground and flings her hands out, making a wall of fire that evaporates the wave coming at her. The resulting steam hides Azula from view. Aang and Katara look left and right, preparing for a sneak attack.

A moment later, Azula jumps out of the steam from one of the larger crystals high above. She attacks with two blue fire balls which Aang and Katara extinguish by bending the water from the channel into a shield. Azula lands on a piece of rock jutting out from one of the large columns. Aang shoots his fists forward and brings his palms down, sending a shockwave through the ground and into the column, destroying it. Azula gasps and drops down between Aang and Azula, pointing her fingers at both of them. Azula looks back and forth between the two of them nervously, waiting for their next move.

Suddenly, a blast of red fire lands between Aang and Azula. They shield themselves from it and turn towards the new opponent, Zuko. He is wearing a simple brown shirt and brown pants, having shed his outer robes. Zuko draws closer to them, poised in his firebending stance. He looks to Azula, who gazes back at him harshly. Zuko then looks to Aang. The airbender gasps just before Zuko punches forward, shooting a fire ball at him. Aang reacts just in time and protects himself by airbending a spiral of wind around his body. He jumps back to gain distance as the flame is dispersed. The camera pans to Azula. She smiles at Zuko's decision and attacks Katara, waving her arm in an arc and throwing a jet of fire at the waterbender with an underhand toss. Katara bends the water from her flask and extinguishes the fire. Cut to a close up of Zuko, furiously sending fireballs at Aang with a series of punches.

Cut to Sokka looking through the small, barred window of a metallic holding cell. He, Toph, the Earth King and Momo are in the same prison that Long Feng had been put in. Sokka's eyes shift from side to side, on the look out.)

Toph: See any Dai Li agents near by?
Sokka: Nope. All clear.

(Toph cracks her knuckles and walks to the door, placing both hands on the metal surface. Cut to the outside hall of the prison. With a screech, the metal door collapses inward, dents forming all over it. The door bursts forward, bouncing off the walls several times. Toph runs out, followed by Momo. Sokka grabs the Earth King by the hand and they make their escape.)

Sokka: Let's go!
Earth King: I'm not leaving without Bosco!

(Shift scenes back to the fight in the crystal catacombs. Zuko assaults Aang with a rapid barrage of fire balls. Aang quickly runs around in a circle at high speed, creating a whirlwind that blocks the attacks. With his momentum built up, Aang comes to a halt and throws his chest out, sending forth a gust of air in the shape of his body. Zuko gasps just as the gust hits him, blowing him back several feet and knocking him to the ground. Aang leaps forward and attempts to attack Zuko with a blast of wind, but Zuko rolls out of the way and counters with a blast of fire to Aang's legs. Aang jumps high into the air and lands on a column. Zuko springs to his feet and shoots more fireballs in Aang's direction. Aang hopsout of the way and lands on the tip of a large, pointy crystal sticking out of the stone wall high above. Zuko lowers his stance and coils his body, gathering energy, and launches a mighty blast of fire at the Avatar. Aang lifts his arms, earthbending the crystals below him to rise up and block the attack. The fire blast is too strong and explodes on contact, shattering the crystals. The scene goes into slow motion and cuts to a close up of Aang as he is blown back. The scene goes back to normal speed and cuts to Zuko. Zuko pulls back his still flaming fist and brings both fists down to his sides, creating two large, thick flames. Waving his arms, Zuko turns the flames into long, searing whips of fire. Aang recovers and readies himself for this new attack, crouching on top of a cluster of crystals. Zuko swings both whips at Aang, who jumps away as the fire whips slice through the crystals. Aang lands at the stop of a cliff, but has no time to relax as Zuko follows up the attack. Aang jumps over the burning whips and on to a nearby column. Zuko slings the fire around and continues his relentless attack.

Cut to Azula as she lands feet first on the floor, a puddle of water beneath her. She and Katara run towards each other. Katara stops and bends the puddle, lifting it up with one arm and thrusting it at Azula with the other. The scene goes into slow motion again and cuts to a close up of Azula as she steps out of the way. She watches the water pass just inches by her face and cut a few hairs from her bangs.

Shift back to Zuko, who is spinning his fire whips over his head. He swings the burning tendrils at Aang, who is clinging to a stalactite. Aang jumps away to another stalactite and the fire whips cut through the one he was just on. Aang pushes off the stalactite with his legs and kicks another one, causing its tip to break and fall off. Aang grabs the upper part still attached to the ceiling, swings down under it and kicks off, hurling himself down. Aang turns himself right side up and slams his fists down into the falling stalactite, plunging it downward. The stone hits the floor, kicking up dust and creating a crater. Zuko is blown back by the shock wave and his body hits a crystal cluster.

Cut to a view of the fight from up above. The camera pans from the dazes Zuko to Azula and Katara across the channel of water. Katara bends puddle on the ground and lobs it at Azula, knocking her to her knees. As Azula starts to get back to her feet, Katara bends the water all around her body. The waterbender creates two long tentacles of water where her arms are and lifts them high into the air. Azula leans forward and thrusts out her fists, releasing a blast of fire, but it is quickly extinguished as one of the water tentacles wraps around Azula's outstretched arm. Katara controls the water, swirling it around with her hand, and swings the other water tentacle down at Azula. Azula tries to counter with a straight thrust kick, but the blue flame shot out is also extinguished and the tentacle wraps around her leg. Katara raises her arms and Azula is lifted into the air, shouting in fright. Just when it seems Azula is finished, Zuko performs a leaping overhead kick, punching downward to gather energy before hopping into the air and bringing his leg up, creating a large arc of flame. Zuko lands and brings his foot down, hurling the flame forward. The arc of fire passes over the channel and slices through the water tentacles, freeing Azula. Azula smiles at her brother before turning her attention to Aang as he crawls out of the crater, still dizzied by his last attack. Azula sets her eyes on the airbender and lunges after him. Cut to Zuko and Katara. Zuko throws two lances of fire at Katara, which she extinguishes with her water tentacles.)

Katara: I thought you had changed!

(Katara swings her water down at Zuko. Cut to an overhead shot of Zuko's tendrils of fire and Katara's tentacles of water clash together over the channel, both equal in strength. Cut to a close up of Zuko.)

Zuko: I have changed.

(Zuko brings his hand up and chops horizontally, sending out another blast of fire. Cut to Azula and Aang facing off. Azula smiles confidently while Aang looks determined to win. Azula brings her hands up and pushes them back while stepping forward, creating two large burning balls of blue fire. She shifts her feet and jets off fire shoot from her soles, the small explosions causing her to rocket forward. Aang raises his arms and earthbends the crystals around him, covering his body with them and creating suit of glistening green armor. He puts both arms forward and slides over the ground, coming at Azula head on. Cut to a close up of Azula rocketing forward, then to a close up of Aang in his armor. Both look like they are about to collide, until Azula hops and slides her foot forward, flinging all of the built up fire at Aang. Aang crosses his arms and tries to defend himself, but the powerful attack shatters the crystal armor and sends Aang crashing into a wall on a cliff up above. Change scenes to the Earth King's throne room. Mai and Ty Lee are there with Bosco. The Fire Nation girls have changed into clothes similar to Azula's. Mai is sitting on the steps that lead up the throne and Ty Lee is playing with Bosco.)

Ty Lee: Come on, it's easy. You just walk on your front paws instead of your rear ones. Like this.

(Ty Lee does a hand stand and begins walking forward on her palms. Suddenly, the floor beneath her surrounds Ty Lee's arms, catching her by surprise. She falls forward and the
stone wraps around her feet as well, leaving her bent backward with her belly sticking up. Bosco growls and claps his paws happily at Ty Lee's awkward position. Cut to Toph, Sokka and the Earth King standing in front of the large doorway.)

Toph: That is a nice trick.

(Sokka pulls out his boomerang and Toph stomps the ground, lifting a large stone block. Zoom in on Mai, who lethargically waves a hand at them.)

Mai: (apathetically) Just take the bear.

(The Earth King runs up to Bosco and hugs him around the head.)

Earth King: Bosco!

(Bosco growls happily as the Earth King buries his face into the bear's fur and snuggles him. The scene cuts and shifts to the fight in the catacombs. Zuko chops downward, flinging one of his fiery whips at Katara, who deflects it with her water tentacle. As Katara counter attacks, Azula leaps from the top of a crystal cluster and shoots a blast of fire down at her. Katara deflects the attack and another blast of fire from Zuko by bending her water into a wall. Zuko swings an arc of fire and Azula shoots a blue fire ball. The fire ball makes a direct hit and Katara is blown back, colliding with a cluster of crystals. She falls to the ground, unconscious. Katara's hair has come undone and flows freely. Azula and Zuko turn their heads towards a rumbling noise. Aang launches dozens of feet into the air, kicking up and enormous dust cloud. Aang slams his body into the floor, cracking the stone ground, and a moment later comes charging at the firebenders by riding on a rolling mound of rock. Zuko and Azula ready themselves for the attack. Aang is furious and determined, but just as he gets close, a Dai Li agent jumps in front of him and lifts his arms, destroying the mound with his earthbending and sending Aang to the floor. Aang wearily picks himself up and looks around. Many Dai Li agents jump down from the cliffs above, forming long rows behind Azula and Zuko. Katara gains consciousness just as the Dai Li surround her. Katara bends the water from the channel and forms a ring of water around her. The water sprouts eight tentacles as she enters the octopus stance. Aang enters his fighting stance and prepares to face his many opponents. He then looks to Katara, who is desperately fighting off the Dai Li agents.)

Aang: There's too many.

(Aang remembers what Guru Pathik told him at the Eastern Air Temple.)

Guru Pathik: (in Aang's memory) The only way, is to let her go.
Aang: (sadly)I 'm sorry Katara.

(Aang turns around and earthbends several crystals out of the ground to form a tent over him. Aang sits down and begins meditating. We enter inside of Aang's mind, where he once again comes face to face with the avatar spirit residing inside him, high above the world and surrounded by the starry heavens. The avatar spirit surrounds Aang in a swirling orb between its hands, and Aang's arrow glows. Shift back to the physical world. Aang's arrow begins to glow here as well, illuminating the crystals that surround him. Zuko and the Dai Li are frightened but also enchanted by this light. Finally, Aang opens his eyes, which glow with great intensity. An incredible explosion of spiritual power destroys the crystals. The Dai Li agents shield themselves from the blast. Aang rises from the ground in a bright pillar of cosmic light. Katara looks up at Aang, hope returning to her. Aang levitates in the air, until suddenly, a bolt of lightning strikes his body. Cut to an extreme close up of Azula's eye where the image of Aang writhing in pain is reflected. The camera zooms out to show Azula smiling confidently as smoke rises from her extended fingers. Cut to Aang's mind. The swirling cosmic ball vanishes and the avatar spirit falls and fades away along with the path of light Aang is standing on. Aang's body plummets to the earth below. Back in the physical world, Aang's body is also falling to the ground. His clothes are charred, and there is a terrible wound on his back where he was struck, as well as a burnt spot on the sole of his foot where the lightning exited. Katara stares shocked and horrified, tears rolling down her face. She turns her body and swirls the water around her. Katara creates a large wave and rides on top of it towards Aang, arms spread behind her. The wave rolls over Zuko and the Dai Li, washing them away. Katara catches Aang and lands on the ground, the water flowing away from her. She holds Aang's unconscious body and looks up hopelessly. Zuko and Azula begin advancing on Katara and the fallen Aang when a fire blast hits the ground between in front of them. Iroh jumps down from a cliff and lands between Katara and his niece and nephew, entering his battle stance.)

Iroh: You've got to get out of here! I'll hold them off as long as I can!

(Iroh punches left and right, shooting fire blasts at any potential attackers, as Katara makes her escape with Aang. He lowers his stance and defends against the stone gloves the Dai Li agents throw at him. Iroh waves both hands forward and flings powerful blast of fire from his fingertips. Katara goes to the waterfall and bends the water. She forms a rising and twisting current that lifts her and Aang upward. Iroh ceases his attack and quietly surrenders once they are out of danger. Two Dai Li agents bend a ring of crystals around Iroh and trap him. The camera zooms in on Zuko, who stares blankly at his uncle. Iroh stares back at his nephew for a moment and turns his head down sadly, saying nothing.

Change scenes to the Earth King, Bosco, Sokka, Toph, Momo, Katara, and Aang all riding on Appa in the. It has reached nightfall and the sky is dark. Katara lays Aang down on Appa's shoulders takes out the oasis water. She removes the top of the container and bends the small amount of water out of it. Katara holds it over her palm and makes it spin in a small circle until it begins to glow with energy. The others watch as Katara lifts Aang and places the water over the wound on his back. It lowers into the wound and enters Aang's body. Katara holds Aang close and begins crying. For an instant, Aang's arrow glows, and a second later he groans from the recovery. Katara gasps and smiles joyfully, turning Aang around to look at him. Aang smiles as he looks back at Katara. Katara pulls Aang to her and holds him close, grateful that he is still alive. Cut to the Earth King's throne room. Azula is sitting in the throne while Zuko stands next to her.)

Azula: We've done it Zuko. It's taken a hundred years, but the Fire Nation has conquered Ba Sing Se.
Zuko: (regretfully) I betrayed Uncle.
Azula: No, he betrayed you. Zuko, when you return home, father will welcome you as a war hero.
Zuko: But I don't have the Avatar. What if Father doesn't restore my honor?

(Azula stands up and places a hand on Zuko's shoulder. Zuko looks at her sadly.)

Azula: He doesn't need to Zuko. Today, you restored your own honor.

(Zuko turns away from Azula and looks down pensively. Cut to a shot of Ba Sing Se as Appa flies away from the city. The Earth King looks on sadly as he leaves his home.)

Earth King: (hopelessly) The Earth Kingdom... has fallen.

(Katara holds a sleeping Aang next to her. She looks onward as Appa flies over the outer wall and into the dark, cloudy horizon.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence, including clips from "The Crossroads of Destiny".]



Act I

(The episode opens with a shot of Aang asleep. Aang begins to awaken as the camera zooms out. He sits up and groans. Bandages cover his arms and abdomen. Cut to Aang's p.o.v. He stares at the floor, his vision blurry and his head swaying. Cut back to Aang sitting on his bed.)

Aang: (clutching his stomach) What happened?

(Aang looks to the side and the camera zooms out to reveal that he is inside a room on a Fire Nation ship. The camera cuts to a banner on the wall, then to Aang looking shocked. Aang turns around and sees the large tapestry with the Fire Nation insignia hanging on the wall behind him.)

Aang: Oh no!

(Aang scrambles offthe bed. Cut to a shot of the room's door. The metal latch squeaks as Aang opens it and peers outside. Aang slowly hobbles down it the dimly lit hallway, teetering from side to side while using his staff and the wall for support. Cut to a shot of Aang coming to a corner. He looks around it and sees two Fire Nation soldiers, one very tall and carrying a club, and the other very tiny.)

Tall Fire Nation Soldier: You hear something?

(Aang gasps and puts his back to the wall before turning the corner and swinging his staff and bending a strong gust of wind at the soldiers. The soldiers shield themselves from the attack and Aang runs down the corridor.)

Tall Fire Nation Soldier: He's awake!

(Cut to a shot of Aang desperately trying to get away from the soldiers, still using his staff for support. The soldiers round the corner and follow after him.)

Tall Fire Nation Soldier: Stop, wait!

(Aang tries to escape, looking back at the soldiers. He comes to a small flight of stairs leading to the deck and climbs up. Aang tries to jump off the steps and onto the deck. Cut to a shot from the deck of Aang falling down. He loses his grip on his staff and it slides across the deck. The dark sky indicates that it is night. Cut to a shot of the staff. The camera follows it as it slides and comes to a stop in front of Hakoda, Bato, and Momo. Hakoda and Bato are dressed as Fire Nation soldiers and Momo is having his chin scratched by Hakoda. They look down at the staff. Cut to Aang, who has a surprised look on his face.)

Aang: (confused) Momo?

(Cut back to Momo, Hakoda, and Bato as they all turn and look at Aang. Momo chirps happily and leaps towards the camera. Aang picks himself off the floor as Momo jumps on to Aang's shoulders and licks his cheek.)

Toph: (off screen) Twinkle-Toes, that's got to be you.

(Cut to a shot of Toph and Katara running towards Aang excitedly. Cut to a shot behind Aang, the camera positioned over his shoulders. Standing in front of Aang are Hakoda, Bato, and a shorter Fire Nation soldier wearing firebender armor. Toph, Katara, and the tiny Fire Nation soldier, who is The Duke, walk on camera from the right, while the tall Fire Nation soldier, who is actually Pipsqueak, runs in from the left.)

Katara: Aang, you're awake!
Aang: Are you sure? (rubs his eyes) I feel like I'm dreaming. (Aang is caught off guard when Katara runs up and embraces him.)
Katara: You're not dreaming. You're finally awake. (Katara lets go and the person dressed as a Fire Nation soldier walks up to Aang and gives him a quick hug.)
Sokka: Aang, good to see you back with the living, buddy.
Aang: (confused) Sokka?

(Cut to a close up of Aang looking very exhausted and confused. The camera rotates around him as he begins to faint.)

Toph: Uh-oh! Somebody catch him, he's gonna...

(Katara runs to catch Aang, but he falls. The camera turns up towards the night sky and fades to black at the sound of Aang hitting the deck.)

Aang: Ughh.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the deck. All of Aang's friends are gathered around him. Appa walks in from off screen and groans softly. Cut to a shot of the entire port side of the Fire Nation ship as it rushes through the sea past the mountain on the other side. The shot fades into a similar shot of a royal Fire Nation ship in the open ocean. Cut to a shot of Zuko, his back to the camera, standing at the edge of the deck. The moon shines brightly through the clouds. Cut to a close up of Zuko.)

Mai: (walking onscreen) Aren't you cold?
Zuko: I've got a lot on my mind. It's been so long. Over three years since I was home. I wonder what's changed. I wonder how I've changed.
Mai: (sighs)I just asked if you were cold. I didn't ask for your whole life story. (smiles and wrapsher arms around Zuko) Stop worrying.

(Mai pulls Zuko's face closer. Cut to a very close shot of Zuko and Mai sharing a kiss. Mai lets go of Zuko and walks off screen. Cut to a close up of Zuko's closed eyes. The camera zooms in as he slowly opens them. The scene cuts to an overhead shot of the Fire Nation ship that Aang and his friends are on.)

Aang: (off screen) Why are we on a Fire Nation ship? Why is everyone dressed this way? And why am I the only one out of it?

(Cut to a shot of Aang and Katara sitting on the deck in front of Appa. Aang is given a red robe by someone is disguise.)

Katara: You need to take it easy, o.k? You got hurt pretty bad. I like your hair.
Aang: (shocked and feeling his scalp) I have hair? How long was I out?
Katara: A few weeks.

(Hakoda enters the shot of Katara.)

Hakoda: Everything ok?
Katara: (looking away) We're fine, Dad.
Hakoda: (offering Aang his hand) I'm Hakoda, Katara and Sokka's father.
Katara: (annoyed) He knows who you are. I just called you "Dad", didn't I?
Hakoda: I guess you're right.
Aang: Nice to officially meet you, Chief Hakoda (offers his hand).
Hakoda: (grabs Aang's arm) It's an honor to meet you.
Katara: (annoyed) Great, great. Now you guys have finally met, so would you mind giving us a little privacy?
Hakoda: Of course.

(Hakoda walks off. Cut to a shot of Aang and Katara and the foreground. Hakoda is seen in the background petting Appa.)

Aang: Are you mad at your dad or something?
Katara: What? Not at all, why would you say that?
Aang: Mmm-emmm (shrugs, but almost immediately groans and holds his side in pain).
Katara: Maybe we should go upstairs. You need a healing session.

(Katara helps Aang to his feet. Fade to a shot of the back of Aang's head. He and Katara and back in his room. The camera points down Aang's back and focuses on the scar left by Azula's lightning. Cut to a shot in front of Aang sitting cross legged on a short platform. Katara is standing behind him and bends the water out of two bowls on either side of Aang and places the water onto his wound.)

Katara: Tell me where your pain feels most intense. (Aang's eyes are squeezed shut and he gives a soft grunt of pain.)
Aang: A little higher.

(The camera quickly zooms in on Aang's eye. The screen flashes and we see a short flashback of Aang entering the Avatar state during "The Crossroads of Destiny". Cut back to Aang's eye, then cut to a shot of Katara moving the healing water over Aang's back and shoulders.)

Aang: Wow, you are definitely in the right area there.
Katara: I can feel a lot of energy twisted up around there. Let me just see if I can...

(Katara pulls the healing water up and away from Aang's scar. Aang arches his back painfully and the screen flashes before cutting to a flashback of Aang being hit by lightning in the Avatar state then Katara holding Aang's body on Appa. The flashback fades to white and the scene shifts back to a profile shot of Aang recovering from the shock.)

Aang: I went down! I didn't just get hurt, did I? It was worse than that. I was gone. But you brought me back.
Katara: I just used the spirit water from the North Pole. I don't know what I did, exactly.
Aang: You saved me.
Katara: (places a hand on Aang's cheek) You need to rest.

(The camera zooms out from the shot of Aang and Katara. The scene cuts to a shot of the Fire Nation capital city and harbor. Cut to Lo and Li, who are seated on top of a very high balcony at the royal plaza facing a large crowd of Fire Nation citizens. Behind them is a large archway filled with flames.)

Li and Lo:Your Princess Azula, clever and beautiful, disguised herself as the enemy and entered the Earth Kingdom's capital. In Ba Sing Se she found her brother, Zuko, and together, they faced the Avatar. And the Avatar fell, and the Earth Kingdom fell.

(The screen flashes white and the scene changes to a flashback of the Dai Li standing at the top of Ba Sing Se's outer wall)

Li and Lo: (voice over) Azula's agents quickly overtook the entire city. They went to Ba Sing Se's Great Walls, and brought them down!

(The Dai Li jump off and begin sliding down the die of the wall, using earthbending to weaken it. The Dai Li agents land on the ground and spring forward, slamming their gloved fists into the wall and causing a large section of it to collapse.)

Lo and Li: (voice over) The armies of the Fire Nation surged through the wall and swarmed over Ba Sing Se, securing our victory.

(Cut to a shot of Fire Nation soldiers marching past the tea shop in the outer ring. Cut to a shot of Pao peeking through the doorway and chewing his fingernails in fear. Jin can be seen behind him, looking shocked. Cut to Fire Nation soldiers riding komodo rhinos through the streets. A rhino passes by the camera, revealing Than holding Ying and Hope. Hope and Ying begin to cry and Than pulls them closer. Cut to a shot of Fire Nation tanks driving up to the Earth King's palace. The scene fades to white and flashes back to a shot of Lo and Li.)

Li and Lo: Now the heroes have returned home. Your princess, Azula!

(Cut to a profile shot of Azula. The camera pans right as she walks towards the edge of the balcony and the crowd cheers for her.)

Li and Lo: And after three long years, your prince has returned. Zuko!

(Cut to Zuko walking out onto the balcony and facing the crowd. The Fire Nation citizens cheer for him as he sullenly gazing over the crowd. The scene shifts to the Fire Nation ship gliding through the water. Cut to a shot of Sokka sitting on top of a crate on the deck, surrounded by the rest of his friends and family. They are all eating bowls of noodles.)

Sokka: After what happened in Ba Sing Se, we had to get you to safety.

(The scene flashes back to a shot of Appa flying away from Ba Sing Se.)

Sokka: (voice over) We flew back to Chameleon Bay, where we found my father and the other Water Tribe men.

(Cut to shot of Appa flying over Chameleon Bay. The camera turns right as Appa flies over a fleet of Water Tribe ships.)

Sokka: (voice over) The Earth King decided he wanted to travel the world in disguise, so he set off alone.

(Cut to a shot of the Earth King smiling rising up into the camera's view. The camera quickly zooms out as he removes his hat and formal garb, revealing nomad clothes underneath.)

Sokka: (voice over) Well, not completely alone.

(Bosco walks on screen from the right and rips off clothes. The Earth King waves goodbye before climbing on Bosco's back and riding off.)

Sokka: (voice over) Soon, the bay was overrun with Fire Nation ships. Rather than fight them all, we captured a single ship and made it our disguise.

(Cut to a shot of two small Water Tribe canoes sneaking up on a Fire Nation ship at night. Cut to three Water Tribe warriors wearing masks climbing on board the Fire Nation ship. The scene fades to white and flashes back to a close up of a map of the northern Earth Kingdom.)

Sokka: (off screen) Since then, we've been traveling west (points to Chameleon Bay and moves his finger across The Serpent's Pass). We crossed through The Serpent's Pass a few days ago. We've seen a few Fire Nation ships, but none have bothered us.
Aang: So, what now?
Hakoda: We've been working on a modified version of the invasion plan.
Katara: (annoyed) It's Sokka's invasion plan.
Hakoda: Yes, Sokka's plan. We won't be able to mount a massive invasion without the Earth King's armies, but the solar eclipse will still leave the Fire Nation vulnerable.
Sokka: So we're planning a smaller invasion. Just a ragtag team of our friends and allies from around the Earth Kingdom. We already ran into Pipsqueak and The Duke.

(Cut to a shot of Pipsqueak with The Duke seated on his shoulders. Both are eating.)

Pipsqueak: Good to see you again, Aang.
Sokka: And the best part is, the eclipse isn't even our biggest advantage. (whispering) We have a secret (looks left and right). You!
Aang: Me?
Sokka: Yep, the whole world thinks you're dead! (stands up and raises his arms triumphantly) Isn't that great?!

(Cut to a close up of Aang. Shock is plastered on his face as the camera zooms in. Cut to commercial.)



Act II

(The show returns to an overhead shot of the stolen Fire Nation ship moving towards an island in the distance. Cut to Aang looking over the side of the ship and looking shocked.)

Aang: The world thinks I'm dead? How is that good news? That's terrible!
Sokka: No, it's great. It means the Fire Nation won't be hunting us anymore. And even better, they won't expect you on The Day of Black Sun.
Aang: No, no, no, no, no. You have no idea. This is so messed up!

(The horn of another ship blares. The camera pans left as Sokka looks over. Cut to a shot of another Fire Nation ship approaching up ahead. Cut back to Aang.)

Aang: I'll handle this. The Avatar is back!

(Aang grabs his glider staff and slams it on the floor, opening its wings, but it causes him to flinch in pain and clutch his side. Bearing through it, Aang grabs the glider's wings and prepares to take off. Cut to an overhead shot of the group.)

Katara: Aang, wait. Remember, they don't know we're not Fire Nation.

(Cut back to Aang. Sweating heavily, he reluctantly folds his glider up. Cut to Hakoda and Bato.)

Hakoda: Everyone just stay calm. Bato and I will take care of this.

(Bato and Hakoda don their Fire Nation helmets. Cut to Pipsqueak lifting up The Duke, who is wrapped in a large piece of tarp. He throws The Duke over Appa, who is sitting in a cargo pit, letting the tarp unravel and cover the flying Bison. Momo jumps into the pit with Appa. Cut to a shot of Aang and Toph crouching inside the stairway leading below the deck. Katara and Sokka join them.)

Aang: (whispering) I hate not being able to do anything.
Toph: Hopefully, you won't need to.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the ships stopping parallel to each other. A bridge lowers across the gap between the two. Cut to a close up of a Fire Nation officer crossing the ship. Two Fire Nation soldiers follow closely behind. Cut to the officer's p.o.v. as he walks up to Bato and Hakoda, who glance at each other. Cut to a shot of the officer setting foot on the ship. Hakoda bows to the officer.)

Fire Nation Officer: Commander, why are you off course? All Western Fleet ships are supposed to be moving toward Ba Sing Se to support the occupation.
Hakoda: Actually, we're from the Eastern Fleet. We have orders to deliver some cargo.
Fire Nation Officer: Ah, Eastern Fleet. Well, nice of Admiral Chan to let us know he was sending one of his ships our way.
Bato: I am sure Admiral Chan meant no disrespect, sir.
Fire Nation Officer: I mean, how hard is it to write a quick note and send a hawk our way?
Hakoda: Next time, we'll send two hawks to be sure you get the message.

(Hakoda and the officer bow to each other before Bato and Hakoda walk off. Cut to a close up of the officer and the two soldiers.)

Fire Nation Soldier: Sir, Admiral Chan has been on leave for two months at Ember Island.
Fire Nation Officer: What? Why doesn't anyone ever tell me anything? Something's not right. They should've known that. I think this is a captured ship. (whispering) Just stay quiet until we're safely across the ramp. Then we'll sink this ship!

(The officer and the soldiers begin to walk back across the bridge. The camera tilts down to show Toph listening to the officer and then looking shocked when she hears his last sentence. Toph climbs out of the stairway and pointing at the officer.)

Toph: They know!

(Toph thrusts her hand towards the floor. Cut to a close up of Toph's hand grabbing the metal and twisting it. The camera tilts up as Toph bends a fissure in the metal leading all the way up to the bridge. The bridge buckles, and the officer and the soldiers lose their balance just as the bridge falls out from underneath them. Cut to a downward shot of the bridge, soldiers, and officer, yelling in fear, falling into the water below. Cut to a close up of Katara. The camera zooms out as she bends a small mountain of water up between the ships. She turns in a circle and thrusts her arms forward. The water slams into the side of the other ship, knocking it back several yards. Cut to a shot of the water washing onto the enemy ship's deck, and then quickly cut to an overhead shot of the two ships. The stolen Fire Nation ship begins to make its escape. Cut to a shot at the water's level of a rope ladder being tossed over the side of the Fire Nation ship to the officer and the soldiers floating in the sea, which the officer grabs and begins to climb.

The scene shifts to an overhead shot of Zuko sitting at the edge of the turtle duck pond at the Fire Nation capital. Cut to a close up of Zuko tearing a bread bun in half before throwing it into the pond. Cut to a close up of the mother turtle duck and its ducklings swimming up to the floating bread and feeding on it. The camera zooms out just as Azula's shadow passes over the turtle ducks, scaring them off. Cut to a shot of Azula standing in front of Zuko with the turtle ducks swimming off screen and quacking in fright.)

Azula: You seem so downcast. Has Mai gotten to you already? Though actually, Mai has been in a strangely good mood lately.
Zuko: I haven't seen Dad yet. I haven't seen him in three years, since I was banished.
Azula: So what?
Zuko: So, I didn't capture the Avatar.
Azula: (gesturing) Who cares? The Avatar's dead. Unless you think he somehow miraculously survived.

(Zuko looks down and away from Azula. The screen flashes white and the scene cuts to a flashback of Katara holding the spirit oasis water during "The Crossroads of Destiny".)

Katara: This is water from the Spirit Oasis, at the North Pole. It has special properties, so I've been saving it for something important.

(The screen flashes white and the scene shifts back to the present.)

Zuko: No. There's no way he could've survived.

(Cut to and zoom in on Azula staring Zuko down, and then to Zuko matching Azula with a glare. Cut to a shot of Azula from over Zuko's shoulder.)

Azula: Well, then I'm sure you have nothing to worry about.

(Azula leaves, exiting off screen. The scene shifts to a close up of a fire bender moving onto screen. The camera quickly zooms out as he ignites an oil covered rock loaded onto a trebuchet. The trebuchet is fired and the camera tilts up as the flaming ammo is flung into the air towards the stolen Fire Nation ship. Cut to a shot of the ignited boulder hitting the water, just missing the stolen ship. Cut to a wide, overhead shot of the Fire Nation ship firing again at the stolen ship. Cut back to the side of the stolen ship. The flaming boulder hits the hull. Everyone on the ship try to regain their balance as it tips. Cut to a close up of Toph before zooming out. She enters an earthbending stance as The Duke stands behind her.)

Toph: Load the Toph!

(Cut to a shot of Pipsqueak heaving a big stone disc over his head. He sets the disc in front of Toph. Cut to a shot of Toph's feet. The camera pans right as she takes two steps forward, slamming her left foot into the floor and popping the disc into the air in front of her. The camera zooms in on Toph just as she turns and shoves the stone disc with her palms, shooting it at the enemy ship. Cut to a shot of the stone disc flying across the water towards the Fire Nation ship. It hits the trebuchet, demolishing it. The camera quickly pans over to another trebuchet being fired. Cut back to Toph launching another disc. Cut to a wide shot between the two ships. The flaming boulder and the stone disc collide in the air and explode.

Cut to Aang and Sokka hiding inside the hall leading to the bridge, both on either side of the doorway leading out to the deck. Outside, a fireball can be seen hitting the water and causing a big splash. Aang attempts to run out and help in the battle, but Sokka grabs his shoulders and shakes his head, stopping Aang. Aang goes back to his hiding spot and knocks his head against his staff in frustration. Cut to a shot of a ballista on the enemy Fire Nation ship pointing downwards and firing. The chained, metal projectile shoots into the water and punctures the hull of the stolen ship. Cut to a shot of the inside of the hull being pierced by the projectile, causing a huge leak. Cut to a shot of the puncture from the outside as water begins to rush in. The chain connected to the projectile is pulled taught. Cut back to the inside of the hull as the projectile is pulled out, expanding the breach and flooding the hull even more. Cut to an overhead shot of Katara at the edge of the deck looking down at the breach. Katara waves her arms upwards. The camera zooms out as Katara pushes her palms down and exhales freezing mist towards the hole in the hull. The mist descends down the ship toward the breach. Cut to a close up of the hole freezing over before cutting to a close up of Katara.)

Katara: I'm gonna give us some cover!

(Katara presses her arms down, pushing down the water between the two ships. Cut to a close up of the water's surface. A cloud of mist forms and rises up. Cut to a shot behind Katara as she lifts her arms up and bends a huge cloud of mist into the air. She pushes her arms out, making the mist float behind the stolen ship, clouding the view. Cut to a wide overhead shot of the mist engulfing both ships. Cut to Toph, The Duke, Bato and Hakoda on deck. The all run when a fireball pierces through the mist. Cut to a shot of Pipsqueak standing by a load of stone discs. He drops the disc he is holding and runs away just before the fireball smashes into the pile of discs. Cut to Aang and Sokka who are still hiding. They are both shaken by the last attack as the debris and smoke fly past the doorway.)

Aang: I can't just stand by and do nothing!(Aang rushes outside.)
Sokka: Aang! No!

(Cut to a close up of Sokka's hand grabbing Aang's staff. Quickly zoom out to a shot of Aang and Sokka.)

Sokka: You're still hurt, and you have to stay secret. Just let us handle this.
Aang: Fine!

(Aang angrily snatches his staff away from Sokka and storms off screen. There is another explosion and Sokka is caught in a wave of smoke. Cut to a wide overhead shot of the ships exiting the mist cloud. Another fireball is fired from the enemy ship and it hits the back end of the stolen ship's deck. Cut to a shot of Katara shielding herself from the attack. The camera quickly zooms out to show the engine on fire in the foreground. Katara bends water up from below and throws it at the fire, extinguishing it. Cut to a shot of Sokka, Toph, and The Duke.)

Toph: How we doing?
Sokka: Things couldn't get much worse.

(Suddenly, the giant serpent from The Serpent's Pass bursts from the water behind Sokka. The camera zooms out to show the serpent towering over the ship and screeching. Cut to Sokka, Toph, and The Duke.)

Sokka: The Universe just loves proving me wrong, doesn't it?
Toph:You make it so easy!

(Cut to a shot of the serpent towering over the ship. It is about the strike when a fireball from the enemy ship strikes it in the head. Cut to a close up of the serpent, showing a charred mark where the fireball hit. The camera zooms out to a wide shot of both ships and the serpent in the background. The serpent dives into the water. Cut to an overhead panning right shot of the serpent swimming under the stolen ship and then under the enemy Fire Nation ship. The serpent emerges and wraps its body around the vessel. Cut to a shot of Sokka and Pipsqueak running up to the edge of the deck. Sokka is shocked to see the serpent attacking the other ship. Cut to a shot of Sokka, Katara and Pipsqueak in the foreground slowly moving away from the sight of the serpent attacking the Fire Nation ship in the background.)

Sokka: Thank you, The Universe!

(The scene fades to an overhead shot of a merchants' pier. The camera tilts down to show the stolen Fire Nation ship docked. Cut to a shot of water dripping from a grating in the ceiling of Aang's room. Cut to a shot of Aang lying on his bed and staring up at the ceiling. He looks over at his door as Toph, Katara, and Sokka enter the room.)

Toph: Hey, Aang, we're going into town to find some dinner.

(Cut to a close up of Aang's stomach. He clutches it as it growls and the camera tilts up to his face.)

Aang: Well, I am pretty hungry. Maybe dinner's a good idea.
Sokka: (pulls out a red headband) Here, tie this around your head. It'll cover your arrow.
Aang: I'm not going out if I can't wear my arrow proudly.
Sokka: Aang, be practical.
Katara: You guys go ahead without us. We'll catch up with you.

(Sokka and Toph leave the room. Cut to a shot of Aang laying on his bed and tapping his finger.)

Katara: I think I understand why being a secret bothers you so much. (places a hand on Aang's shoulder The camera tilts up to Katara) You don't want people to think you failed.
Aang: You're right, I don't. But the problem is, I did fail.
Katara: Aang, that's not true.
Aang: It is true. I was in Ba Sing Se. I was there, but I lost. And now, the Earth Kingdom has fallen for good.
Katara: Remember, there's still an invasion plan.
Aang: (angry) And I hate the invasion plan, too! I don't want you or anyone else risking your lives to fix my mistakes. (grabs the tapestry above his bed and rips it off its hanger, throwing it to the floor and knocking over his staff) I've always known that I would have to face the Fire Lord, but now, I know I need to do it alone.
Katara: Aang.
Aang: Katara, please. Just go, please.

(Cut to a shot of Katara. She tilts her head down sadly and makes her way to the door.)

Katara: Is there anything you need?

(The camera pans right to a close up of the right side of Aang's face.)

Aang: I need to redeem myself. I need my honor back.

(The scene fades to a close up of the scarred side of Zuko's face. He is walking down a large hallway inside the Fire Nation palace. Cut to Zuko's feet. The camera tilts up toward his face, which looks worried. Cut to a shot behind Zuko as he stands in front of an archway covered by a red curtain with a gold symbol of the Fire Nation on it. Zuko takes a deep breath, braces himself and walks forward, parting the curtain. The camera zooms in, revealing the Fire Lord's throne room. The throne room is filled with dark, ornate pillars. Fire Lord Ozai sits on his throne up on the dais, separated from the rest of the throne room by a trench of fire. Cut to a close up of Ozai, shrouded in shadow. There is a quick shot of Zuko before the scene shifts to the hallway outside Aang's room. Katara enters the view carrying a tray of food and inside.)

Katara: I brought you some food.

(Cut to Katara's p.o.v. She looks left and right, finding no sight of Aang. Cut to a close up of Katara)

Katara: Oh no!

(Cut to a shot of Katara feet. The tray falls to the ground and the food spills onto the floor as Katara runs out of the room. Cut to Aang flying through the clouds on his glider. The scene changes to an overhead shot of the Fire Lord's throne room. The camera tilts up towards Ozai. Cut to a shot of Zuko falling to his knees and bowing before his father.)

Ozai: You have been away for a long time. I see the weight of your travels has changed you. You have redeemed yourself my son (stands up and walks forward).

(Cut and zoom in to a close up of Zuko looking up. Cut to a shot of Ozai's chest. The camera tilts up and reveals Ozai's face for the first time.)

Ozai: Welcome home.

(Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(The scene opens back to a faraway shot of Aang flying over open water. Cut to a close up of Aang, wincing from his wounds. He loses altitude and almost hits the water before regaining control. Cut to an overhead shot of the top of the bridge tower of the stolen Fire Nation ship. Cut to a shot of Bato and Hakoda. Katara runs up to them, tears in her eyes.)

Bato: I'll leave you two alone.

(Bato walks off screen and Katara walks up to Hakoda.)

Hakoda: What's wrong Katara?
Katara: He left.
Hakoda: What?
Katara: (frustrated)Aang. He just took his glider and disappeared. He has this ridiculous notion that he has to save the world alone. That it's all his responsibility.
Hakoda: Maybe that's his way of being brave.
Katara: (angry) It's not brave. It's selfish and stupid. We could be helping him. And I know the world needs him, but doesn't he know how much that we need him too? How could he just leave us behind?

(There is a brief moment of silence as Hakoda lets Katara's words sink in.)

Hakoda: You're talking about me too, aren't you?
Katara: (crying) How could you leave us, Dad? I mean, I know we had Gran Gran, and she loved us, but...but we were just so lost without you.

(Katara turns away and sobs. Hakoda puts a hand on her shoulder.)

Hakoda: I am so sorry, Katara.

(Katara hugs Hakoda and continues to cry into his chest. Hakoda returns the embrace.)
Katara: (crying)I understand why you left. I really do, and I know that you had to go, so why do I still feel this way? I was so sad and angry, and hurt.
Hakoda: I love you more than anything. You and your brother are my entire world. I thought about you every day I was gone, and every night when I went to sleep. I would lay awake missing you so much, it would ache.

(Cut to a close up of Hakoda. The camera tilts down to Katara, tears running down her cheeks, before the scene cuts to the Fire Lord's throne room. Zuko kneels on the floor before as he paces to the left.)

Ozai: I am proud of you, Prince Zuko. I am proud because your sister conquered Ba Sing Se. I am proud because, when your loyalty was tested by your treacherous uncle, you did the right thing, and captured the traitor. And I am proudest of all of your most legendary acco mplishment. You slayed the Avatar.

(Cut to a profile shot of Ozai as he walks around behind Zuko. The camera tilts down to Zuko as he raises his eyebrow in surprise.)

Zuko: What did you hear?
Ozai: Azula told me everything. She said she was amazed and impressed with your power and ferocity at the moment of truth.

(There is a brief close up of Zuko looking away before the scene cuts to a shot of Aang gliding barely a foot over the ocean. The wing of his glider dips into the water as Aang tries to keep control. Briefly cut to a close up of Aang before cutting to a panning right shot of a blockade of Fire Nation ships.)

Aang: Blockade.

(Cut back to Aang as he takes a huge breath. Cut to an overhead shot of Aang as he collapses his glider and dives into the water. Aang torpedoes through the water and under the blockade, scaring away three green sealguanas. Cut to a shot of Aang popping out of the water on the other side. He catches his breath and is clearly exhausted. Aang spots a large peace of drift wood and swims over to it. Aang grabs on to it and smiles as an idea comes into his head. Cut to a quick zooming out shot of Aang windsurfing, using the driftwood as a board and his glider staff as a sail and bouncing over the waves. Fade to another shot of Aang wind surfing, but now it is raining heavily. Aang struggles to hang on as the board bounces high into the air. Aang hits the water, but wipes out. He disappears into the waves and the glider staff towards the camera just before cutting to a tilting up shot of the Fire Nation royal palace. Cut to a shot of Azula lying in her bed. The door opens and the light shines in, casting Zuko's shadow over Azula.)

Zuko: Why'd you do it?
Azula: (eyes closed) You're going to have to be a little more specific.
Zuko: Why did you tell Father That I was the one who killed the Avatar?
Azula: Can't this wait until morning?
Zuko: (sternly) It can't
Azula: (Sighs, opens her eyes and sits up) Fine. You seemed so worried about how father would treat you because you hadn't captured the Avatar. I figured, if I gave you the credit, you'd have nothing to worry about.
Zuko: But why?
Azula: (gets out of bed) Call it a generous gesture. I wanted to thank you for your help, and I was happy to share the glory.
Zuko: You're lying.
Azula: (walks past Zuko) If you say so.
Zuko: You have another motive for doing this. I just haven't figure out what it is.
Azula: Please, Zuko. What ulterior motive could I have? What could I possibly gain by letting you get all the glory for defeating the Avatar? Unless somehow, the Avatar was actually alive. All that glory would suddenly turn to shame and foolishness. But you said yourself that was impossible. Sleep well, Zuzu.

(Azula lays her head on her pillow and closes her eyes. Cut to a shot of Zuko walking out of the room and down the hall. The scene cuts to a lightning strike in the sky. Cut to Aang desperately trying to hang on to the drift wood and not be swept away. He reaches out to his glider as it floats further away. Aang yells as he is caught in a huge wave and is plunged beneath the water. Aang swims back up and grab a hold of the drift wood. Cut to a very close profile shot of Aang.)

Aang: I'm not gonna make it. I failed.

(There is another flash of lightning and the spirit of Avatar Roku appears before Aang.)

Aang: Roku?
Roku: You haven't failed, Aang.
Aang: But everyone thinks I am dead again. They think I've abandoned them, and I'm losing this war. I'm letting the whole world down.
Roku: If anyone is to blame for the state of the world, it is me. I should've seen this war coming, and prevented it. You inherited my problems and my mistakes. But I also believe you are destined to redeem me, and save the world.
Aang: I don't know.

(A beam of moonlight casts over Aang.)

Yue: (off screen) You already saved the world.

(Aang looks up to the sky. The camera tilts up to show the moon shining through the clouds. The spirit of Yue appears in front of it.)

Yue: And you'll save the world again. But you can't give up.

(Yue descends towards Aang. Cut to a shot of Aang staring in wonder. His expression quickly turns to determination.)

Aang: You're right. I won't give up.

(Aang waves his arm in a circle. The camera zooms out far as Aang bends a large wave of water behind him, pushing him forward. Cut to a shot of Aang climbing on top of the drift wood and riding it like a surfboard. He waves his hands to both sides and picks up speed. Cut to a shot behind the wave. The camera tilts up and zooms out to show Yue, her back to the camera, raising her arms, making the wave grow even higher. Cut to a shot of the wave rolling across the ocean.

Cut to a shot of Aang riding on top of it and towards the camera. Cut back to Yue as she ascends back to the moon. The scene fades to a shot of Crescent Moon Isle. Lava trails flow from the top of the volcano and down into the sea. The camera tilts up to one part of the shore where the lava has not touched. Cut to a shot of Aang lying unconscious on the rocky shore. The camera tilts up towards the top of the still active volcano. Fade to another shot of the isle, only now it is dawn. Cut to a profile shot of Aang still unconscious. Momo jumps onto Aang's chest from off screen and licks Aang's cheek, awakening him. Momo hops off Aang as he groans and sits up. Cut to a shot of Katara running to Aang. Sokka and Toph follow after. Katara drops to her knees and hugs Aang's head.)

Katara: You're ok!

(Toph, Sokka, Momo and Appa all gather around and form a group hug. After a moment, Aang breaks away.)

Aang: I have so much to do.
Katara: I know, but you'll have our help.
Toph: You didn't think you could get out of training just by coming to the Fire Nation, did you?
Aang: What about the invasion?
Sokka: We'll join up with my dad and the invasion force on the day of the eclipse.
Toph: Hey, what's... (grabs Aang's broken and burnt glider from out of the water) Oh...it's your glider.

(Toph hands the glider to Aang as they all stand up.)

Aang: That's okay. If someone saw it, it would give away my identity. It's better for now that no one knows I'm alive.

(Aang turns around and jumps onto a mound that trickling out lava. Cut to a close up of Aang and zoom in as he looks down solemnly. Aang spins the glider above his head and slams it into the lava end first before jumping away. Cut to a shot of the glider sticking out of the mound and zoom out. It ignites and is consumed by the flames.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence includes clips from "The Awakening".]



Act I

(The episode opens with the camera panning up the outer slope of the Fire Nation capital city volcano. It pans up to the crater wherein lies the royal city, and pauses. Cut to the Fire Lord's palace. Cut to Zuko's bedroom. The prince is tossing and turning, unable to sleep. He rises from bed and dons a hooded cloak. Slipping by an unguarded path over the crater's rim, he makes his way to a prison tower embedded in the slope of another, nearby volcano. As he stands in the prison courtyard, looking upward, a guard spots him.)

Guard: Who's there?

(Without a word, Zuko turns and leaves. Cut to the Fire Nation outer islands, daytime. A mysterious cloud is scudding rapidly over the water. As it lights on one of the islands, voices emanate from it.)

Aang: I think I see a cave below.
Sokka: Shhush... keep quiet! (The cloud disperses with a blast of airbending to reveal the kids, riding Appa. Sokka dismounts and begins a furtive reconnaissance.) Great job with the cloud camo, but next time, let's disguise ourselves as the kind of cloud who knows how to keep its mouth shut.
Toph: (sarcastically) Yeah, we wouldn't want a bird to hear us chatting up there and turn us in.
Sokka: Hey! We're in enemy territory. Those are enemy birds.

(He points upward to four of the enemy, perched on a rock just behind him. One hops down onto his head and squawks plaintively. The kids laugh. Sokka is unamused. They walk toward the cave, Sokka lurking behind. Of a sudden, he leaps over their heads to ward off some [entirely imaginary] threat. Peering suspiciously about, he dashes into the cave, followed by the rest of the gaang.)

Sokka: Well, this is it. This is how we'll be living until the invasion begins. Hiding in cave after cave...after cave...after cave... (His head drops further to his chest with each repetition of the word.)
Katara: Sokka, we don't need to become cave people. What we need is some new clothes.
Aang: Yeah, blending in is better than hiding out. If we get Fire Nation disguises, we'll be just as safe as we would be hiding in a cave.
Toph: Plus...they have real food out there. Does anyone wanna sit in the dirt and eat cave-hoppers? (She punches the cave wall and several hoppers hop out. Momo catches one and begins chowing down. The kids appear revolted.)
Sokka: (to Momo) Looks like we got out voted, sport. (To the kids) Let's get some new clothes.

(The scene shifts to a nearby Fire Nation laundry. Several items of clothing are hung on lines outdoors, suspended over steam vents. The kids, hiding in some rocks close by, survey the scene.)

Aang: I don't know about this. These clothes belong to somebody.
Katara:I call the silk robe! (She leaps from the rocks, runs to her prize and snatches it from the line.)
Aang: But if it's essential to our survival...then I call the suit!

(Plunder ensues. The laundry's lone attendant, stealing a nap in the doorway, is oblivious.

Cut to a secluded beach nearby. The kids are trying on their new duds. A shot of Aang from behind, tying the belt from his suit around his forehead to conceal his arrow. He turns around.)

Aang: Ta-dah! Normal kid.
Toph: Hmm...I should probably wear shoes, but then I won't be able to see as well. Sorry shoes! (Sitting down, she brings her knee up to her chest, pulling on the shoe's upper and popping out the sole with her foot, which propels it into Sokka's face. She stands up and evaluates her new customized footwear.) Finally, a stylish shoe for the blind earthbender.
Katara:(partially visible in the right side of the screen, from behind) How do I look?

(Cut to a full frontal shot of Katara, presumably from Aang's p.o.v. The camera slowly pans upward from toe to top to reveal a ravishing Fire Nation beauty... with one false note. Aang, smitten, blushes, and then suddenly realizes the problem.)

Aang: Uh...your mom's necklace.
Katara: (chagrined) Oh...oh, yeah. I guess it's pretty obviously water tribe, isn't it?

(Relunctantly, she removes it.

The scene changes to the bazaar of a nearby town, where Katara buys some new, more fire-themed neckware. Cut to an alley, where she puts it on and Toph and Sokka try on their own new accessories - a new headband for Toph and a topknot clasp for Sokka. For his part, Aang smoothes down Momo's ears and tucks him beneath his coat.)

Aang: I used to visit my friend Kuzon here a hundred years ago. So everyone just follow my lead and stay cool. Or as they say in the Fire Nation - "Stay flamin'"! (He saunters out, the kids following. A man is eating a meat shish kebab on the sidewalk. Aang waves to him as they walk by.) Greetings, my good Hotman!
Fire Nation Citizen: (surprised) Uh, hi. I guess?

(Aang's lingo is perhaps a little out of date. Sokka leads the way to a butcher's shop.)

Aang: Oh, we're going to a meat place?
Sokka: Come on, Aang. Every one here eats meat...even the meat!

(He indicates a nearby cow-hippo, greedily scavenging a pile of fly-blown fish.)

Aang: (unconvinced) You guys go ahead. I'll just get some lettuce out of the garbage.

(They enter. Aang turns around and begins dispensing affable greetings to his new countrymen.)

Aang: Hotman. Hotman. Hotman. Hotman. Hotman.

(Three imposing, official-looking figures approach him.)

Fire Nation Officer: It's over, we caught you.
Aang: Who me?
Fire Nation Officer: It couldn't be more obvious that you don't belong here. (Aang cringes, expecting the worst.) Next time you play hooky, you might want to take off your school uniform.
Aang: Heh, heh. Uh!

(He is seized by the collar and pulled towards the camera.

Cut to the exterior of the Fire Nation school, dominated by a large statue of Ozai. Cut to an interior classroom. The door opens and Aang is thrust in. He and his new classmates stare at each other in mutual astonishment.)

Teacher (Ms. Kwan): Oh! Is this a new mind ready for molding?
Aang: That's right. (He knocks himself on the head to indicate its lack of contents.) Let the molding begin.

(The truant officers turn to leave.)

Ms. Kwan: Wait a minute. (The officers stop and turn around.) You're not from the Fire Nation! (Suspenseful moment as Ms. Kwan approaches Aang with a critical eye.) Clearly you're from the colonies.
Aang: (relieved) Yeah, the colonies. Of course. The Fire Nation colonies in the Earth Kingdom.
Ms. Kwan: Your etiquette is terrible. In the homeland, we bow to our elders. Like so.

(She bows her head, making a fist with her right hand, holding her left hand open and pointed upward so that the palm is perpendicular to her body, and bringing the two hands together so that the proximal phalanx of her infolded right index finger just touches the base of her left palm, again perpendicularly. The effect is of a small, stylized flame.)

Aang: Sorry ma'am.

(Aang attempts the salute, but reverses hands and meets his right palm with his entire left fist, instead of just the index finger. Ms. Kwan taps his fist with her ferrule, obviously disapproving. Aang looks around for help. A girl in the front row [On Ji] catches his eye and demonstrates the proper technique. Aang smiles, reverses hands, and lowers his fist.)

Ms. Kwan: (tapping his head with her ferrule) And we don't wear head coverings indoors.
Aang: Um, I have a scar. It's really embarrassing.
Ms. Kwan: Very well. What is your name? Or should we just call you, "Mannerless Colony Slob"?
Aang: (chuckling) Just "Slob" is fine. (This doesn't go over well. He tries a different tack.) Or, uh... Kuzon.

(He turns to face the class with a friendly smile.

Cut to a shot of a bell ringing, signaling school's out. Kids stream out the doors. Aang walks toward the camera, pulling open his jacket and whispering to Momo.)

Aang: We made it through the day, Momo. And...it was pretty fun!
On Ji: (from behind him) Don't let the headmaster catch you with that monkey.
Aang: (concealing Momo and turning around with an innocent grin on his face) What monkey?
On Ji: Don't worry, I'm not a tattletale. My name's On Ji. I like your headband, by the way.

(Aang smiles, meditating a reply, when he is suddenly jostled from behind by a tall Fire Nation boy [Hide], who walks past him to stand by On Ji.)

Hide: (contemptuously) On Ji, you don't have to baby-sit the new kid.
Aang: (amiably)Wow. (He bows, Fire Nation style.) You must be one of those popular kids I've been hearing about.
Hide: That's right. Now listen, friend...I know you're from the colonies, so I'll say this slowly. (He enunciates carefully, getting in Aang's face as he does so.) On Ji...is...my...girlfriend. Don't forget it.

(He pokes Aang in the chest. Momo stirs and complains beneath Aang's jacket. Aang smoothes him down and grins sheepishly at Hide's suspicious glare. Hide points at his eyes and then at Aang to indicate that he'll be keeping an eye on him. He turns and walks away with his arm around On Ji.)

Aang: It was nice meeting you.
Small Fire Nation Boy (Shoji): (approaching Aang) I don't believe it. He didn't beat you up. Not even a little.
Aang: (modestly) I guess I'm just lucky.
Shoji: We were on our way to play hide-and-explode. You wanna come?
Aang: I'd love to!

(Cut to the exterior of the cave, night. Aang slides down the roof of the cave to its entrance and walks in. The kids are seated around a fire.)

Katara: Where have you been? We've been worried sick!
Aang: (covered in burn marks) I got invited to play with some kids after school.
Sokka: (standing up, flummoxed) After what?
Aang: (happily) I enrolled in a Fire Nation school, and I'm going back tomorrow.
Sokka: Enrolled in what?!

(He keels over.

Cut to the prison tower. An interior shot of feet walking down a corridor. The guard from the beginning of the episode hears the footsteps and spins around, leveling his spear. He recognizes the hooded figure.)

Guard: You again? Stop where you are. (The figure raises its head, revealing a well-known face with a telltale scar.) Prince Zuko?! (Zuko grabs him by the collar and slams him against the wall.) Ugh!
Zuko: (in a tone of insolent menace) I'm going in for a visit. You're gonna stand guard here, and no one is going to know about this.

(Cut to an overhead shot of Iroh's cell. The cell is bisected by a wall of bars so that one half is accessible from the door and the other half serves as a cage. Iroh, unkempt and dressed in rags, is seated crosslegged on a mat, facing the wall to the right of the cell door as one enters it. Zuko walks in and up to the bars.)

Zuko: Uncle. It's me.

(He removes his hood. Iroh turns away to face the back of his cell, scowling. Cut to commercial.)



Act II

(Scene: the interior of the cave. The kids are seated around the fire.)

Sokka: Aang, I'm trying to be mature and not immediately shoot down your idea. But it sounds...really terrible.
Toph: Yeah, we got our outfits. What do you need to go to school for?
Aang: Every minute I'm in that classroom. I'm learning new things about the fire nation. I already have a picture of Fire Lord Ozai.

(He holds it up towards the camera.) And here's one that I made out of noodles! (He displays his masterpiece to the camera.)
Sokka: Impressive, I admit. But I still think it's too dangerous.
Aang: (deviously) I guess we'll never find out about the secret river then. It goes right to the Fire Lord's palace. We were supposed to learn about it in class tomorrow...
Sokka: Hmm... I am a fan of secret rivers. (relenting) Fine, let's stay a few more days.
Aang: Flamey-o, Hotman! (He runs off in excitement.)
Sokka: (turning to Katara) Flamey-o??
Katara: (shrugging her shoulders) Mmm-mm?

(Cut back to Iroh's cell.)

Zuko: (standing at the bars) You brought this on yourself, you know. We could have returned together. You could have been a hero! (Iroh turns a shade further away from Zuko.) You have no right to judge me Uncle. I did what I had to do in Ba Sing Se, and you're a fool for not joining me. (Iroh is silent.) You're not gonna say anything? (Enraged, he kicks a stool and bends a blast of fire at the wall.) Argh! You're a crazy old man! You're crazy, and if you weren't in jail, you'd be sleeping in a gutter!

(He leaves, slamming the door behind him. Iroh bows his head, closing his eyes.

Cut to the Fire Nation classroom. Ms. Kwan enters and the children rise.)

Ms. Kwan: Good morning, class. Recite the Fire Nation oath.

(They turn to the larger-than-life portrait of Ozai that dominates the room's rear wall, bow Fire Nation style and begin reciting. Aang stands up awkwardly, a few beats behind everyone else, and does his best to follow along.)

Students: My life, I give to my country. With my hands, I fight for Fire Lord Ozai and our forefathers before him...
Aang: Fire Lord...forefathers...
Students: With my mind, I seek ways to better my country, and with my feet...
Aang: (desperately) Firebenders...Fire Lord...blah, blah, blah, blah.

(The other students stop reciting and begin giggling helplessly. Ms. Kwan scowls. The kids turn back around and sit down.)

Ms. Kwan: (rising and striking the open book before her with her ferrule for emphasis) Since it's obviously hilarious to mock our national oath, we'll begin with a pop quiz on our Great March of Civilization.

(The students groan and take pens and paper in hand.)

Ms. Kwan: Question one: What year did Fire Lord Sozin battle the Air Nation Army? (Aang raises his hand. She acknowledges him suspiciously.) Kuzon?
Aang: (rising) Is that a trick question? The Air Nomads didn't have a formal military. Sozin defeated them by ambush.

(The entire class stares open mouthed at this brazen heresy.)

Ms. Kwan: (flustered) Well, I don't know how you could possibly know more than our national history book. Unless you were there a hundred years ago.
Aang: (thinking better of it and sitting down) I'll just write down my best guess.

(Cut to band practice, in a different classroom. The music teacher taps his stand and the amateur orchestra commences playing. Aang, armed with a Tsungi horn, pauses a few moments to draw in a deep breath and suddenly lets fly a boisterous blast of something resembling music, maniacally dancing in place as he does so. The rest of the class stops playing, dumbfounded.)

Music Teacher: Kuzon?
Aang: (stops playing) I know. I'm a terrible Tsungi hornist.
Music Teacher: No, child. That hullabaloo going on with your feet. Is that a nervous disorder?
Aang: I was just dancing. You do dances here in the homeland, right?
Shoji: (sitting beside him) Not really, no.
Music Teacher: (walking to the window) Dancing is not conducive to a proper learning environment. Young people must have rigid discipline and order.
Aang: But what about expressing yourself?
Music Teacher: (walking back to his stand) I know sometimes we're so moved by our love for our nation, that we can't control our own bodies. (Overcome with emotion, he claps his hand to his face and reconsiders.) If you must, you may march in place quietly next time the urge hits you.

(The orchestra recommences, Aang marching quietly as directed but clearly malcontent.

Cut to the school courtyard. It appears to be recess, or lunch, and kids are scattered about the yard. As Aang exits the school building and enters the yard, the kids spot him and begin whispering; clearly, he has caused a sensation.)

On Ji: (approaching him) Oh, hi, Kuzon. I really liked that crazy dance you were doing.
Aang: Thanks, On Ji. I could show it to you again, if you'd like.

(He starts and yells as a blast of fire hits him from off-screen. Cut to Hide, across the yard, who has thrown the blast.)

Hide: What'd you say, colony trash? You're gonna show her something? (He approaches them.)
Aang: Just some dance movements.
Hide: Nobody shows my On Ji anything, especially movements.

(He lunges at Aang, who steps neatly out of the way. For the next several seconds, Hide tries to land a blow on Aang, who is too quick and agile to be caught. At last, Hide is propelled by his own momentum onto the ground. At this unfavorable juncture, the School Headmaster enters the scene, and naturally assumes that Aang has been bullying Hide, rather than the other way around.)

School Headmaster: Picking fights on your second day? We need to have a conference to discuss your punishment. Bring your parents to my office after school.
Aang: Parents? But...
School Headmaster: Don't be late.

(He turns and leaves, followed by a smirking Hide. Aang is momentarily crestfallen - but suddenly appears to have an idea.

Cut to the Headmaster's office. Pan down from the obligatory portrait of Ozai on the wall to the Headmaster, sitting directly beneath it.)

School Headmaster: Thank you for coming, Mr. And Mrs...

(The camera cuts to Sokka, Aang, and Katara, in that order, seated facing the
Headmaster. Sokka is wearing a fake moustache and beard. Katara's hair is tied up in two buns on either side of her head, and her waist is padded to mimic pregnancy.)

Sokka: Fire! Wang Fire. This is my wife, Sapphire.
Katara: Sapphire Fire, nice to meet you.
School Headmaster: (dubiously) Mr. and Mrs...Fire, your son has been enrolled here for two days, and he's already causing problems. He's argued with his history teacher, disrupted music class, and roughed up my star pupil.
Katara: My goodness! That doesn't sound like our Kuzon.
School Headmaster: (indulgently) That's what any mother would say, ma'am. Nonetheless, you're forewarned. If he acts up one more time, I'll have him sent to reform school... (cut to a menacing close-up of the Headmaster's face)... by which I mean the coal mines. Are we clear?
Sokka: Don't you worry, Mr. Headmaster. I'll straighten this boy out somethin' fierce. (He blusters in Aang's face.) Young man, as soon as we get home, you're gonna get the punishment of a lifetime!
School Headmaster: (with an air of subdued sadism) That's what I like to hear.

(The kids rise and leave, Sokka swaggering proudly...the role of overbearing father figure seems to suit him.

Cut to a sheltered little plateau on the rim of the royal volcano. Zuko and Mai are enjoying a sunset picnic and a chance to canoodle in private.)

Mai: (referring to the sunset) Orange is such an awful color.
Zuko: (snickering) You're so beautiful when you hate the world.
Mai: I don't hate you.
Zuko: I don't hate you, too. (They kiss.)
Azula: (off-screen) Ahem! (The two lovers look up at her in irritation.) Zuko, could I have a word with you?
Zuko: Can't you see we're busy? (He and Mai resume their "business".)
Azula: (not to be put off) Oh, Mai... Ty Lee needs your help untangling her braid.
Mai: (complaisantly) Sounds pretty serious. (She gets up and leaves. Walking past Azula, towards the camera, she shoots the princess a quick, poisonous glance behind her back.)
Azula: So...I hear you've been to visit your Uncle Fatso in the
prison tower.
Zuko: (standing, incensed) That guard told you.
Azula: (smugly) No, you did. Just now.
Zuko: (sitting back down) Okay, you caught me. What is it that you want, Azula?
Azula: (solicitiously) Actually, nothing. Believe it or not, I'm looking out for you. If people find out you've been to see Uncle, they'll think you're plotting with him. Just be careful, dum-dum.

(Zuko looks up at her suspiciously.

Cut to the cave and a close-up of Sokka's face, still bearded, as he bends over Aang and rants at him.)

Sokka: That settles it. No more school for you young man!

(He straightens up and strokes his beard imperiously.)

Aang: I'm not ready to leave. I'm having fun for once, just being a normal kid. You don't know what it's like, Sokka. You get to be normal all the time.
Toph: (mockingly) Ha, ha.

(Sokka scowls.)

Aang: Listen, guys, those kids at school are the future of the Fire Nation. If we wanna change this place for the better, we need to show them a little taste of freedom.
Sokka: What could you possibly do for a country of depraved little fire monsters?
Aang: I'm gonna throw them...(he does a quick tap dance flourish ...a secret dance party!

(The kids are stunned. Sokka is the first to recover.)

Sokka : (pointing) Go to your room!

(Cut to commercial.)



Act III

(Scene: the interior of the cave, later that same night. Toph earthbends a bandstand from the cave floor.)

Sokka: (arranging candles) I can't believe we're having a dance party. It seems so... silly.
Aang: Don't think of it as a dance party, but as a cultural event celebrating the art of fancy footwork.

(He demonstrates his fancy footwork as Katara bends beverage into an earthbended punchbowl in the background. Cut to a shot of Fire Nation kids approaching the cave. Cut back to the cave interior, where Toph has suddenly felt the vibrations of their feet.)

Toph: They're coming! Everyone stop bending!
Aang: (approaching Appa) Sorry, buddy. You should probably wait out back. (Appa grumbles and shuffles into a tunnel at the back of the cave.) I know, you've got fancier feet than anybody...and six of 'em!

(Cut to a quick montage of Fire Nation kids playing various musical instruments on the bandstand. Cut to a wide shot of the entire band. Aang leaps in front of them exultantly and, facing them, spreads his arms wide.)

Aang: Ladies and gentlemen, The Flamey-os! Yeah, this ought to get everybody moving.

(He turns around. It hasn't. The Fire Nation kids are standing, huddled together, uncertain.)

Shoji: Now what do we do?
Aang: This is when you start dancing.
Fire Nation Boy 1: (as his head disappears into his collar like a turtle's into its shell) I don't think my parents want me dancing in a cave.
Fire Nation Boy 2: Yeah, what if someone finds out? (He looks around anxiously and scuttles off-screen.)
Aang: Oh, boy. Listen, guys...dancing isn't something you think about. It's a form of self-expression that no one can ever take away from you.
Shoji: Maybe it was different in the colonies, Kuzon. But we don't do that here.
Aang: Sure you do. You have for generations. It just so happens that I know several classic fire nation dances. A hundred years ago, this was known as "The Phoenix Flight."

(He runs in a circle, squatting and kicking his legs in the fashion of Russian folk dance, his arms stretched straight out behind him in imitation of wings. The students ooh and aah.)

Aang: And this was the "Camelephant Strut".

(He hops on one foot toward the camera, alternating feet with each hop, passing his palms in front of his face as he does so.

He turns a somersault through the air and lands in front of two girls, who giggle, embarrassed. He somersaults backwards and lands expertly on one foot, bowing. The students are amazed. Cut to Toph and Katara, sitting to the side, drinking beverage.)

Toph: Who knew Twinkletoes could dance?

(Katara smiles.

Cut to the interior of Iroh's cell. Zuko kneels and passes a packet of food through the bars.)

Zuko: I brought you some komodo-chicken. I know you don't care for it, but I figure it beats prison food. (Iroh, sitting down, is silent, his back to his nephew.) I admit it. I have everything I always wanted, but it's not at all how I thought it would be. The truth is, I need your advice. (He clenches the bars.) I think the Avatar is still alive. I know he's out there. I'm losing my mind. (desperately) Please, Uncle, I'm so confused! I need your help. (Iroh is motionless. Zuko stands, enraged.) Forget it! I'll solve this myself! Waste away in here for all I care!

(He walks to the door and opens it, turning back for just a moment, and then quickly slams the door. Cut to a close-up side profile of Iroh's face. A single tear rolls down his cheek.

Cut back to the cave. Aang, somersaulting through the air, lands in front of On Ji, who is looking away bashfully. A friend nudges her and she looks up at Aang, who extends his hand to her. She blushes as he leads her out to the dance floor.)

Aang: And this is how they do it in the ballrooms of Ba Sing Se.

(He passes his arms in an undulating motion across his chest, stepping from side to side as he does so. On Ji imitates him.)

Sokka: Wow, they look pretty good together.
Katara: (dismissively, looking away) Eh, if that's what you like.

(She steals a jealous glance at the couple.

More of the kids join Aang and On Ji. The crowd is loosening up.)

Aang: Yeah, that's it. That's the sound of happy feet. All right, go with that. Everybody freestyle!

(Cut to a lengthy shot of a Fire Nation boy doing an elaborate "freestyle" dance, reminiscent of juba dancing. Cut to a shot of the remaining crowd, who are slowly beginning to get their groove on. Cut to Katara, sitting alone at a table with her head in her hand. She looks up. Aang is standing in front of her, hand outstretched.)

Katara: I don't know, Aang. These shoes aren't really right for dancing, and I'm not sure that I know how to...
Aang: (masterfully) Take my hand.
Katara: Okay.

(He leads her out to the center of the floor and whispers in her ear. They stretch out their arms and touch wrists, circling around the axis thus formed.)

Katara: Aang, everyone's watching.
Aang: Don't worry about them. It's just you and me right now.

(She looks into his eyes, blushing, and then confident. They begin an elaborate dance that seems to be based off capoeira, cartwheeling through the air, crouching, and kicking over one another's heads. The crowd stops dancing and watches them, entranced.

Cut to the exterior of the cave, some distance away. The Headmaster, accompanied by three truant officers and Hide, sees the light and hears the music from the cave and scowls.)

School Headmaster: It is a dancing party. You did the right thing by telling me, Hide.
Hide: (bowing) Anytime, Headmaster, sir.

(Cut to the interior of the cave, where the party is in full swing.)

Fire Nation Boy 1: (dancing) This is incredible. It's like my inhibitions just disappeared. (The Headmaster and his entourage enter the cave, and the dancing grinds to a halt. The boy's head shrinks back into his collar.) Okay. They're...back again.

(Aang, oblivious, dances across the screen.)

Headmaster: He's the one we want. (Aang looks up, alarmed.) The boy with the headband!

(He points and the truant officers make a beeline for Aang.)

Aang: Uh-oh.

(Aang dashes into the crowd, an officer following close behind. The crowd parts in front of the officer to reveal a lone figure with his back turned to the camera, wearing a headband.)

Officer: Got ya!

(He grabs the figure by the shoulder and turns him around. It is Shoji, who has tied his belt around his head in imitation of Aang.)

Shoji: (smiling) Looking for me?
School Headmaster: That's not the one! He's here somewhere. Don't let him leave the cave!

(The officers dart through the crowd, the Headmaster joining them. Headbands are multiplying everywhere. One by one the officers snag them, only to discover one wide-eyed innocent face after another.)

On Ji: Yes?
Fire Nation Boy 2: Hi there.
Fire Nation Boy 1: How we doing?
Fire Nation Boy 3: Looking for someone?

(The officers, disoriented, back into a small knot in the middle of the cave as the students encircle them. By now the entire student body has morphed into replicas of Aang. The camera sweeps across them.)

Fire Nation Student: Who are you looking for?
Shoji: Do you need something?
Students: Over here.

(Cut to the back of the cave. The gaang are escaping down the tunnel Appa disappeared into earlier. Aang, last out, stops and turns back for a moment. Shoji, at the edge of the crowd, turns and winks at him. Aang bows [Fire Nation style] and runs down the tunnel. Two walls of rock abruptly slam across the tunnel's entrance, sealing it off. Shoji gapes as he realizes his new friend is a despised earthbender.

Cut to the Headmaster, who is still standing, fuming, in the center of the cave, flanked by his officers. Two of them cannot restrain themselves and are discreetly swaying to the music [which miraculously is still playing]. The Headmaster admonishes them.)

Headmaster: Stop that. Stop that!

(They quickly stand to attention.

Cut to the gaang, safely ensconced in Appa's saddle and flying away through the night sky.)

Katara: We're safe, Sokka. You can take off the moustache, now.
Sokka: (smugly) Oh, no, I can't. It's permanently glued to my skin. (He strokes it, unaccountably pleased with himself.)
Toph: Way to go, Dancypants. I think you really did help those kids. You taught them to be free.
Aang: I don't know. It was just a dance party, that's all.
Katara: Well, that was some dance party, Aang.

(She leans over and kisses him on the cheek. He blushes. Cut to Sokka, sitting crosslegged near the pommel.)

Sokka: (rocking lazily back and forth and clapping his hands slowly like a tranced-out beatnik) Flamey-o, sir. Flame-ee-o.

(Cut to a seedy industrial quarter somewhere in the Fire Nation. Smokestacks cloud the night sky. Pan downward to a small yard bisected by railroad tracks. Zuko, hooded, walks into the middle of the yard and removes his hood. A clanking noise is heard off-camera. Two large boots, one of them metal, stamp into view to frame the screen, Zuko visible between them, facing the wearer of the boots.)

Zuko: You're sure you weren't followed? (Cut to a side view. Zuko is speaking to an ominous looking figure twice his height.) I've heard about you. They say you're good at what you do. And even better at keeping secrets. The Avatar's alive. I want you to find him. (Cut to a close-up of Zuko's face.) And end him.

(Cut to a close-up of Combustion Man's face. Cue the scary music. Zoom inward to the inverted eye tattoo on his forehead. Fade to credits.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence includes clips from "The Awakening" and "The Headband".]



Act I

(The episode opens with Appa, the kids in his saddle, slogging his way down the course of a sludge-infested river somewhere in the Fire Nation. Aang and Momo are frolicking in the putrescent water.)

Aang: (playing hide-and-go-seek) Momo! (He ducks underwater before Momo sees him, resurfacing nearby.) Oh Momo! (He ducks again, surfaces again, and the lemur finally spots him.) Ah! Ha ha, you found me, buddy. (It seems to finally dawn on Aang that he is swimming in toxic filth. He airbends himself up into the saddle.) Hey guys, I think this river's polluted.

(He bends the residual goop off himself, sliming the rest of the gang in the process. Another blast of air and everyone's clean.)

Sokka: (fishing pole in hand) Well, that explains why I can't catch a fish around here. Because normally my fishing skills are... off the hook! Get it? Like a fishing hook?

(The sound of chirping crickets is actually audible...or maybe that's birdsong. Either way, the joke is a flop.)

Toph: Too bad your skills aren't on the hook. (Toph's sally is more successful; the kids laugh, except Sokka, who scowls.)
Katara: It looks like we'll need to go somewhere else to get food. (A long scroll of paper unrolls in front of her.) Assuming that'll fit into Sokka's master schedule.

(The camera pans outward to reveal the end of the scroll in Sokka's hands. He is studying it intently.)

Sokka: Hm...it's doable. But that means only two potty breaks today!
Aang: Hey, maybe we can get food there.

(He points to the little village of Jang Hui, just visible down river.

Cut to a secluded spot in the nearby uplands, where Aang is covering Appa with a blanket of turf. Momo is already similarly concealed.)

Aang: Now you look just like a little hill with horns. Bye buddy!

(Appa grumbles. The kids head out.

Cut to a shot of the kids standing on the cliffs that overlook the river, surveying the scene.)

Toph: I don't feel anything. Where is this village?
Sokka: It's in the middle of the river!
Dock: Sure is! (Pan down to reveal the village eccentric in his boat.) My name's Dock. Mind if I ask who you are?
Katara: We're, um, from the Earth Kingdom colonies.
Dock: Wow... colonials! Hop on; I'll give you a ride into town.

(They hop, and Dock proceeds towards the village.)

Katara: Why do you guys live on the river?
Dock: Because we're a fishing town. At least that's how it was before the factory moved in. (Cut to a shot of the ominous-looking Fire Army munitions factory, visible through a gap in the cliffs.) Army makes their metal there. Moved in a few years ago and started gunking up our river. Now our little village is struggling to survive.

(They arrive in town and Aang waves goodbye as the kids head out to explore.)

Aang: Thanks for the ride!

(A montage of village life, which is stricken with poverty and enforced idleness.)

Katara: Look at this place. It's so sad. We have to do something to help.
Sokka: No, we can't waste our time here! We have a bigger mission that we need to stay focused on. These people are on their own!
Katara: These people are starving, but you turn your back on them?! How can you be so cold and heartless?
Sokka: I'm not turning my back, I'm just being realistic! We can't go around helping every rinky-dink town we wander into. We'll be helping them all by taking out the Fire Lord!
Toph: (slapping her hand over Sokka's mouth) Hey, loudmouth! Maybe we should be a little quieter when we talk about taking out the
Fire Lord.
Sokka: (a little quieter) Come on, Katara, be reasonable about this. You know our mission has to come first.
Katara: (relunctantly) I guess so.
Aang: Let's just get what we need and go.

(They approach the counter of an outdoor market stall, staffed, to all appearances, by the same aged fisherman who gave them a lift into town.)

Sokka: Hey, Dock. You work here too?
Dock: I'm not Dock, I'm Xu. Dock's my brother.

(The kids are baffled.)

Aang: But we just saw you. You're even wearing the same clothes. The only difference is your hat.
Dock: Dock works on the
docks, that's why they call him "Dock", and I work in the shop, that's why they call me "Xu".
Aang: I don't get it.
Dock: Me neither. (He pulls out a crate filled with rancid grey seafood.) What can I getcha? Hey, I'll give you a special deal. If you buy three fish, I'll throw in a clam for free.

(The kids are revolted by the foul haul...but they do need to eat.)

Sokka: We'll just take the fish. Mind telling your brother we need a ride back to shore?

(Dock ducks beneath the counter; when he reappears, he is wearing his original headgear.)

Dock: Hey, colonials. My brother says you need a lift.

(As they turn away to follow him, an urchin runs up to Katara.)

Boy: Can you spare some food?
Katara: (sadly, giving him a fish) I wish I could spare more.

(The boy runs away and she watches him give the fish to a sick woman, presumably his mother.

Cut to the kids' campsite back up on the cliffs. While the benders of the group bend the pollution out of their cooking water, Sokka ponders his schedule.)

Sokka: Our detour into town today has completely thrown off our schedule. It's gonna take some serious finagling to get us back on track.
Toph: (sarcastically) Finagle away, O schedule master.
Sokka: Well, for starters, it looks like we'll need to wake up forty-three minutes earlier every day.
Katara: Forty-three minutes?
Sokka: Look, we only have a few weeks to get to the Fire Lord in time for the invasion and the eclipse - which, by the way, only lasts for eight minutes. And we just lost a whole day. So if we want to make up the time and stay on schedule, we have to wake up early!
Toph: Well,I'm not waking up early.
Sokka: Or we could just cut out all of our eating breaks.
Aang: What?
Katara: No way.
Toph: Forget it.
Sokka: I got it, how's this From now on, we'll take food breaks and potty breaks at the same time.
Gang: Ew.
Sokka: Hey, it might be gross, but it's efficient. Either way, we have to leave here first thing tomorrow morning.

(Close-up of Katara's face - she can't get the villagers' plight out of her mind.

Cut to the campsite, the following morning. Appa is lying on his side, groaning, while Katara ministers to him.)

Aang: What's the matter, Katara?
Katara: I think Appa's sick.
Sokka: What, Appa's sick? That's awful!
Toph: Wow, Sokka, I didn't realize you cared so much.
Sokka: Of course I care. I might as well just throw our schedule away now. (The rest of the gang gives him the evil eye and he quickly changes his tune, rushing solicitously to Appa's side.) And I'm concerned because my big, furry friend doesn't feel well.
Toph: He must have gotten sick from being in the polluted water.
Aang: He doesn't look sick. You okay, buddy? (He pulls Appa's tongue out.) His tongue is purple! That can't be good. Katara, can you heal him?
Katara: It looks like he needs some medicine. Maybe we can find the right herbs in town.

(Cut to the village, which has experienced a renascence over night, bustling and prosperous.)

Toph: Is it just me, or does this place seem different?
Aang: Yeah, are the people...happier?

(The urchin from the previous day runs by, bouncing a ball, and Katara smiles to herself. The kids walk up to Dock's market stall, where, by his hat, he is currently inhabiting his "Xu" persona.)

Sokka: Hey, Xu, what's going on with everyone today?
Dock: Ah, something amazing happened last night. Food was delivered to our village by a mysterious and wonderful person...the Painted Lady.
Katara: The Painted who now?
Dock: The Painted Lady. (He plunks a statuette of the Lady down on the counter: she is a heavily draped damsel with elaborate eponymous face make-up and capped with a wide-brimmed conical hat.) She's part of our town's lore. They say she's a river spirit who watches over our town in times of need. I always thought she was just a legend. Until now.
Sokka: See, we don't need to help these people, they already have someone to help them. All we need is medicine for our sick friend.
Dock: Medicine? Sorry, all the medicine we have goes to the factory. That's why there's so many sick people in our village.
Katara: Looks like we need to stay another night so Appa can rest.
Sokka: (exasperated) I guess you're right. You got any more food to sell?
Dock: (a piscine monstrosity in each hand) Would you like the
one-headed fish, or the two-headed fish?
Sokka: (mulling it over briefly) Two-headed! (The kids are revolted.) What? You get more for your money that way.

(Cut to the village, late that night. A mysterious figure, resembling Dock's Painted Lady statuette, glides over the water on a carpet of fog and enters the village. She steps into a dwelling, presumably an infirmary, where several people are sleeping on the floor, and bends over each of them in turn, Healing them. Her last patient is the mother of the urchin seen earlier, her son sleeping at her side. He wakes as the Painted Lady turns to go and silently follows her out the door.)

Boy: Thank you, Painted Lady.

(She stops, startled, acknowledges him with a nod, and glides away into the night.)



Act II

(The village, the next day. Dock is polishing his Lady figurine with a rag as Sokka steps up to the counter.)

Sokka: Hi, Dock. Is Xu around?
Dock: Let me check...(He runs around the shop and ducks beneath the counter to switch hats.) Hey there! Back again, are ya?
Toph: We need more food. Our friend is still sick and we can't leave until he's better.

(Dock obligingly presents them with a platter of noxious clams.)

Dock: Oh, well, that's too bad. Maybe if you guys are lucky, the Painted Lady will visit you in the night, and heal your friend.
Sokka: (the eternal skeptic) And maybe she'll cook us a midnight snack, and we'll all have a sing-along.
Dock: (oblivious to sarcasm) Yeah, may be! You know, last night she visited us again. Healed most of our sick folks.
Aang: Is that why this place seems so festive?

(We see the villagers erecting a large statue of the Lady in the town square, to cheers and applause.)

Dock: Yep, it's all because of the Painted Lady.
Katara: Can you believe how much an entire village can be affected by one lady? I mean... spirit?
Sokka: Well, I hope she returns every night. Otherwise this place would go right back to the way it was.
Katara: (indignantly) Why would you say that? Look how much better off these people are.
Sokka: Yeah, now, but without her they wouldn't be able to fend for themselves. If she really wanted to help, she would use her spirit magic to blow up that factory. (He makes gestures to indicate explosive spirit magic.) Oooooo... pow.
Aang: Spirit magic doesn't work that way, Sokka. It's more like...(He does an elaborate dance to one-up Sokka) Woooooo....

(Katara stalks off angrily as the boys ham it up together.)

Aang and Sokka: Wooooooo.....

(Cut to the campsite, that night. Katara slips out of her sleeping bag and stuffs dried grass into it to disguise her absence. She dons a makeshift Painted Lady costume, wrapping a ragged gown around her, painting her face in a bended ice mirror and finishing off with a wide conical hat similar to the Lady's, but with a diaphanous white veil covering her face. She glides away toward the village, but not quietly enough: she wakes Momo, and he wakes Aang.)

Aang: What's the matter, buddy? (He spots Katara just as she is slipping out of sight.) It's her! (He runs after her.) Hello, Painted Lady spirit! (Katara, shocked, begins running away, but she is only barely able to keep ahead of a determined airbender.) Excuse me, I don't mean to bother you, but my friend's sick and we're on kind of a tight schedule. Wait, but I'm the great bridge between your world and mine. I know Hei Bai, we're close personal friends. (He chases her across the landscape, over the river and into the village. Running along a rooftop, he shouts to her...) Heeeyy!!

(...but, distracted by the vocalization, he runs into a roofpole. Katara continues on through the village, across the river and onto the opposite riverbank. She stops to catch her breath, turns around...and there's Aang.)

Aang: My name's Aang. I'm the Avatar.
Katara: (in a ridiculous fake voice, and attempting to hide her face) Well, hello, Avatar. I wish I could talk, but I am very busy.
Aang: Yeah, me too. I hate that. (He takes a peek under her hat brim.) You know, you're really pretty for a spirit. I don't get to meet too many spirits, but the ones I do meet...not very attractive.
Katara: (chuckling nervously) Thank you, but...
Aang: (suspiciously)You seem familiar, too.
Katara: A lot of people say that.
Aang: No...you really seem familiar.
Katara: Look, I really should get going...

(She turns to leave, but Aang sends her hat flying with a blast of airbending. She frantically pulls it back onto her head but...)

Aang: Katara !
Katara: (defeated) Hi, Aang.
Aang: You're the Painted Lady ! But how?
Katara: I wasn't at first, I was just trying to help the village. But since everyone thought that's who I was anyway...I guess I just kind of became her.
Aang: So you've been sneaking out at night? Wait...is Appa even sick
Katara: He...might be sick of the purple berries I've been feeding him, but, other than that, he's fine.
Aang: I can't believe you lied to everyone so you could help these people.
Katara: I'm sorry, I know I shouldn't have.
Aang: No, I think it's great! You're like a secret hero.
Katara: Well, if you want to help...there's one more thing I have to do.

(Cut to the factory. The two are standing beneath it staring up at its menacing expanse.)

Aang: You want to destroy this factory?
Katara: Yes. Sokka was just kidding, but he was right. Getting rid of this factory is the only way to help these people permanently.

(They enter the factory and hard-core bending-assisted mayhem ensues. The carnage ends with a shot of explosions rocking the building and the kids running out. The sun is rising as they return to the campsite.)

Aang: (triumphantly) Ha ha! (He imitates the sound of an explosion.)
Katara: Shhh, we don't want to wake Sokka. (It is a little late for this; Sokka and Toph are waiting for the pair as they walk into camp. Katara is all innocence.) Hi! Sokka! We were just...out on a...morning walk!
Sokka: Oh, really? A morning walk? (He dumps the dry grass from her sleeping bag onto the ground.) I know you're the Painted Lady. I know you've been sneaking out at night, and I know you've been lying about Appa and feeding him purplizing tongue berries! (Toph sticks out her now-purple tongue and holds up a bag of berries as evidence.) Katara, what you did put our whole mission in jeopardy. We're leaving right now. (He turns to Aang.) And how long did you know about this?
Aang: Hey, I just found out this morning.

(Cut to a shot of the menacing General Mung emerging from the smoking ruins of the factory and looking vengefully towards the village.

Cut back to the campsite, where the kids are packing. A strange sound fills the air and they look up to see a detachment of Fire Soldiers on jet skis racing down the river towards the village.)

Toph: What's going on?
Aang: Fire Nation soldiers are heading to the village.
Sokka: (to Katara, angrily) What did you do?!
Katara: (guiltily) I...kind of destroyed their factory.
Sokka: You what?!
Katara: It was your idea!
Sokka: I was joking. I also said to use spirit magic and made funny noises. Did you even think this through? The army's gonna blame the villagers. They're headed there right now to get revenge.
Katara: Well, what was I supposed to do?
Sokka: Leave! Do nothing!
Katara: (dramatic close-up) No. I will never, ever turn my back on people who need me. (She gets up to leave.) I'm going down to the village, and I am gonna do whatever I can.

(Sokka, after a moment of soul-searching, gets up and follows her.)

Sokka: Wait. I'm coming too.
Katara: I thought you didn't want to help.
Sokka: You need me, and I will never turn my back on you.
Katara: Sokka. You really do have a heart. (They hug.)
Aang: (overcome) He really does have a heart, doesn't he?

(Wiping away tears, he turns to Toph for confirmation. The earthbender, however, has a low tolerance for this kind of girly twaddle and socks him in the chest, felling him to the ground. The act ends with a shot of Fire Army jet skis bearing down on the village.)



Act III

(General Mung is addressing the gathered villagers.)

General Mung: I thought we could live as neighbors, in peace. But I guess I was wrong. You steal our food, our medicine...and then you destroy our factory.

Dock: (popping out of the crowd) We didn't do any of that. (popping out in a different place wearing his Xu hat) Yeah, the Painted Lady brought us food. She's the one that healed our sick, not your medicine.
General Mung: Oh, right, the mysterious Painted Lady did it. And I suppose she drew the army emblem on your containers, too. This is a town of thieves and liars! (He bends a fireblast, destroying a house.) Where's your Painted Lady now? We're going to cure the world of this wretched village. (The Fire Soldiers begin demolishing the town. Two of them light a large flammable ball perched on a buoy in the river, but a mysterious gust of wind from nowhere blows the fire out, twice.) Light it again!

(They do, and it is blown out again. Eerie flute music begins floating over the water.)

Female Fire Soldier: Look at that! Where's it coming from? (She refers to a heavy fog that is rapidly pouring in.)
Male Fire Soldier: I don't know. Something strange is going on. (An ominous growling noise echoes over the river.)
Boy: It's the Painted Lady. She's coming.
General Mung: There is no Painted Lady!
Female Fire Soldier: What is that sound?

(A repetitive thudding noise, as of giant footsteps, has begun. Pan over the river to the further bank where we see that the thudding is caused by Toph elevating and dropping a large boulder, Appa is doing the growling, and Sokka is manning the flute.)

Male Fire Soldier: Maybe it is her.

(The fog parts dramatically to reveal Katara in full Painted Lady regalia. She pauses a moment for the theatrical effect and then rushes toward the Fire Soldiers in a burst of waterbending. She alights on the dock and slowly approaches them.)

General Mung: Do something! (He pushes his minions forward. As they timidly draw near, they are rattled by a blast of airbending. Aang is hiding beneath the dock.) Stand your ground! (Katara waterbends two jet skis into a nearby cliff. As she raises her hand to wreak further damage, the Fire Soldiers jump into the remaining jet skis and speed off, leaving Mung to hold the fort.) I'll take care of you myself.

(He bends a arc of fire at Katara. Aang, still concealed beneath the dock, sends Katara flying into the sky on a column of air; the flame passes harmlessly beneath her. For good measure, Aang rends the dock in two with a blast of wind, sending Mung flying into the river. As he flounders, Katara rises out of the polluted water before him and raises her arms threateningly.)

Katara: Leave this village and never come back.

(He swims desperately away from her. A stray jet ski passes by and he clambers into it; the ski buzzes off. Sokka and Toph row towards the village as the people applaud Katara.)

Boy: I knew you'd come.
Dock: Thank you!
Random Villager: Painted Lady, you're the best!
Dock: Me and my brothers really owe you a lot. (Looking at her, he has a shock of recognition.) Hey, wait a minute! I know you! You're not the Painted Lady, you're that colonial girl!
Boy: Yeah, you're the lady that gave me a fish.
Dock: You've been tricking us. You're a waterbender!
Random Villager: She's a waterbender! How dare you act like our Painted Lady?

(The crowd surges forward in anger. Sokka runs forward to intervene.)

Sokka: Maybe she is a waterbender, but she was just trying to help you. Because of her, that factory won't be polluting your river, and the army is gone. You should be down on your knees thanking her.
Katara: Sokka, it's okay. (to the villagers) I shouldn't have acted like someone I wasn't, and I shouldn't have tricked you. But I felt like I had to do something. It doesn't matter if the Painted Lady is real or not. Because your problems are real, and this river is real. You can't wait around for someone to help you. You have to help yourself.
Dock: She's right, but what should we do?

(Toph, who has hidden in the crowd, pops out and makes a suggestion in a disguised voice.)

Toph: Maybe we can clean the river.
Dock: Yeah, we can clean the river! (The crowd cheers this idea.) Thank you. You know, you're not so bad for a waterbender.
Sokka: You wouldn't mind keeping that a secret, by the way, would you?
Dock: No problem. Keeping my mouth shut is a personal specialty. My brother Xu, on the other hand, hoo! He's a blabbermouth.
Katara: So, Dock, are you gonna help us clean?
Dock: No, ma'am. I'm going to get my other brother, Bushi. He loves cleaning rivers. (Dock brazenly switches hats right in front of them.) Alright, I'm Bushi! Let's get some river cleaning done.
Aang: Aha, I knew it! I knew you were the same guy. You're the shop owner and the boat guy.
Dock: Oh, you must be talking about my brothers, Dock and Xu.
Aang: (exasperated) No, I just saw you! You switched hats and called yourself a different name!
Dock: Oh, you know who does that? My brother Dock. (conspiratorial whisper) He's crazy.

(Aang fumes. It's hopeless - Dock has been drinking industrial sewage for far too long.

The afternoon is spent cleaning the river, with extensive bending help from the kids. By sunset, the river is blue and pristine.

Nighttime, back at the campsite. Katara has gone down to the river as the others sleep. Suddenly an apparition appears before her...the Painted Lady is "real" after all.)

Painted Lady: Thank you.

(She recedes into the fog and disappears. Katara smiles.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence includes clips from "The Desert" and "The Headband".]



Act I

(The episode opens with a shot of a meteor shower flying across the night time sky. The camera tilts down to the ground.)

Katara: Wow, this is amazing to watch.

(Cut to a shot of Aang and company lying on a makeshift roof covering Appa and staring up at the sky.)

Sokka: Kind of makes you realize how insignificant we are.
Toph: Eh, you've seen nothing once, you've seen it 1,000 times.

(There is a sparkle in the sky as a large meteorite enters the atmosphere and falls toward the earth.)

Sokka: Oh, man. You've never notseen anything like this.

(Sokka, Aang, Momo and Katara all sit up and stare at amazement at the meteorite, engulfed in blue fire. The camera follows the meteorite as it whistles through the air and passes over their heads. Sokka turns around and watches as the meteorite crashes in a huge, blue explosion off in the distance, causing him to shield his eyes. Toph stands up in surprise. The camera zooms out of a shot of the group all looking at the smoke rising from an orange glow. Aang, Katara, and Sokka look to each other nervously.

Cut to a shot of a town nestled in the mountains. The camera zooms out to show Appa flying down towards a large, fire filled crater where the meteorite landed.)

Katara: The fire is gonna destroy that town.
Aang: Not if we can stop it.

(Cut to a shot of Appa landing close to the fire. Aang, Toph, and Sokka jump off of Appa while Katara slides onto Appa's neck and takes his reigns.)

Katara: There's a creek over here. I'll bend the water on to the fire. (Katara whips Appa's reigns and flies off.)
Aang: Toph, let's make a trench to keep the fire from coming any closer.
Sokka: (dejectedly) What should I do?

(Cut to a shot of Aang and Toph looking back. Momo flies past the screen and chirps.)

Aang: Keep an eye on Momo (Momo flies to Sokka and lands on his head.)
Sokka: So what, I'm just a lemur-sitter (petting Momo's head) There, there. Feel better?

(Cut to Aang and Toph running toward the fire. They both swing their arms down and cut a fissure through the ground in front of the fire. Aang and Toph raise their hands, then fling their arms to both sides, bending the fissure into a trench and pushing the fire back. Cut to Sokka and Momo. Flaming embers fall around them. Sokka frantically stamps one out with his club while Momo stamps out the rest and jumps back on Sokka's shoulders. Sokka looks back to see all the other fires put one and gives Momo a sour expression. Cut to Katara and Appa flying over the nearby creek. Katara bends a huge orb of water out of the creek and high into the air. Cut to a close up of Katara bending the water behind her, stabilizing it. Cut to Sokka watching Appa fly over the fire while Katara sprays a shower of water from the orb, putting out most of the flames. Cut to Toph moving her hands from side to side, bending a large, rectangular slab of stone to roll over its edges and stomp out more flames. Cut to Sokka and Momo as they watch the stone slab pass by. Cut to a shot of Aang taking the orb of water from Katara with his waterbending as Appa flies past him.)

Aang: (bending the water around) Sokka, stand clear.

(Cut to Sokka and Momo.)

Sokka: (disappointedly) Right, stand clear. Got it.

(Sokka stands up, picks up Momo, and begins to walk away. Cut to Aang. He bends the water behind him and takes a deep breath before pushes his arms forward, throwing the water the water at the fire and exhaling a gust of wind. Cut to Sokka carrying Momo. Momo quickly flies away before Sokka is caught by surprise by the torrent of water. Cut to an overhead shot of the flaming crater. A globe of water grows out from the center and explodes, spreading a light shower of snow all over the area, putting out all the fire. Cut to Aang as Appa and Katara land nearby and Toph walks up to him.)

Aang: (dusting his hands off) Good work, everybody.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the snow covered crater. The camera zooms out before cutting to a shot of Sokka emerging from a pile of snow. Momo slides past him on the ice covered ground.

The scene cuts to a shot of the outside of the Fire Nation prison. Cut to the inside of a very dark cell. The door opens and light pours in over Iroh. He is leaning against the wall, eyes glazed over and drooling. Cut to a shot from floor level of Warden Poon walking up to the bars of the cell. The warden drops a bowl of mush on the floor in front of the cell and kicks it over to Iroh, spilling it. Iroh scrambles at the food, desperate and gasping. He falls face first into the mush and begins to slovenly shovel it into his mouth.)

Warden Poon: (descending) Look at you. You're just a fat, disgusting old man. You do nothing, you say nothing. You just eat and roll around in your own filth like a pig. You're a disgrace.

(Warden Poon spits on the floor before turning away and exiting the cell. Cut to a close up of Iroh. He smiles and flicks the stray strands of his hair back. Iroh picks up the bowl of mush and assumes a much more dignified, cross legged position and continues eating.

The scene cuts to a shot of the small Fire Nation town Shu Jing situated in the
mountains next to a cliff overlooking a river. Cut to Aang, Katara, and Toph seated at an outdoor table at a local restaurant, each with trays of food.)

Aang: These people have no idea how close they were to getting toasted last night.
Toph: (eating a dumpling) Yeah, the worst thing about being in disguise is we don't get the hero worship anymore. I miss the love.
Sokka: (off screen, sarcastically) Boo-hoo, poor heroes.

(Cut to a shot of Sokka sitting at the edge of the floor by himself, a tray of steaming smoked sea slug next to him.)

Katara: What's your problem? You haven't even touched your smoked sea slug.
Sokka: It's just...all you guys can do this awesome bending stuff like putting out forest fires, and flying around, and making other stuff fly around. I can't fly around, ok (sadly) I can't do anything.
Katara: That's not true. No one can read a map like you.
Toph: I can't read at all.
Aang: Yeah, and who keeps us laughing with sarcastic comments all the time I mean, look at Katara's hair, right (grabs a lock of Katara's hair and gestures to it) What's up with that?
Katara: (embarrassed) What? What's wrong with my hair? (Katara looks left and right nervously, trying to cover her hair.)
Aang: (apologetic) Nothing, I was just trying to...
Sokka: Look, I appreciate the effort, but the fact is each of you is so amazing and so special, and I'm not. I'm just the guy in the group who's regular.
Katara: (sits down next to Sokka) I'm sorry you're feeling so down, but I hope you know none of us see you that way. (pauses a moment, then places a hand on Sokka's shoulder) I know something that's gonna make you feel better.
Sokka: (depressed) You do?

(Cut to a quick zooming out shot of Aang, Sokka, Katara and Toph standing in the doorway of a weapons shop.)

Sokka: (clapping his hands excitedly) Shopping!

(Sokka runs forward. Cut to a shot of him examining the various weapons displayed on the tall racks.)

Sokka: Maybe a little something to reinvigorate my battling. (pulls a nunchaku from the rack) Hey, how about these (begins twirling the nunchaku) Ho-ya! Smack-a-dacka-doo!

(Sokka accidentally hits himself in the head and falls over, knocking over a few of the poles weapons on the rack and making Toph flinch. Cut to Katara fitting on a pair of gloves.)

Aang: (off screen) What do you think? (cut to a titling
up shot of Aang wearing an extremely stylized and complex suit of heavy, shiny armor) Pretty slick, huh? (cut to a close up of an alarmed Katara) All I need to complete the outfit is a wind sword.
Katara: (shielding her eyes from the shine of the armor) What's a wind sword?
Aang: It's where I get a sword handle. And then I just swing this around and bend air out like a blade. (Aang raises a sword handle a swings it around, making wind noises.)
Katara: Yeah...nice.

(The heavy armor creaks and begins to fall over. Aang, Unable to move anything but his arm, starts to panic. Katara tries to stop Aang from falling, but Aang and the armor hit the floor with a loud thud.)

Aang: I'll just stick to what I got.

(Cut to Sokka holding a pole weapon with a blade the end, a guandao. He swings it to one side, the swings it over his head and twirls it in a circle. The weapon flies up towards the ceiling like a helicopter and Sokka puts his hands behind his back innocently. Still within the same background, Sokka is next seen dragging an enormous, metal club across the floor. He groans as he tries to lift it, but loses his grip and falls off screen. Sokka is next seen holding two swords. He marches past the screen and chops downward with them, making short battle cries in pace as he does so. Sokka is next seen spinning a chain over his head, but he ends up wrapping the chain around him and falls over. Sokka is next seen running past the screen, carrying a very wobbly spear.

Cut to a close up of Sokka examining a sai before using it as a toothpick. Something catches Sokka's eye. The camera rotates around Sokka and brings into view a sword rack on the wall, and a particular sword framed and positioned above the others. Cut to a close up of the sword. The camera pans right, showing all the details of the hilt and scabbard. A dragon is depicted on the scabbard. Cut to a close up of Sokka eyeing the sword.)

Sokka: Ooo. (walks to the sword, closely examining it and feeling the scabbard) That's what Sokka's talking about.
Shop Keeper: (off screen) You have a good eye. (everyone gathers around the sword) That's an original from Piandao, the greatest sword master and sword maker in Fire Nation history. He lives in the big castle up the road from here (walks away).
Aang: That's it. That's what you needed all along, Sokka.
Sokka: A sword?
Aang: Not the sword...a master. (Sokka pulls the sword off the rack) We've all had masters to help us get better. You should see if you can study with Piandao.
Katara: That's a great idea. I could've never gotten to where I am without Master Pakku. Everyone needs a teacher.
Toph: I learned from badger moles. They don't talk, but they're still good teachers.
Sokka: (pulls out the sword and examines the blade) It would be nice to be a master swordfighter. All right, I'll talk to him.

(The scene cuts to a shot of the top of the bars of Iroh's cell. A ray of sunlight shines through a small window. Cut to an overhead shot of Iroh lying on his back on straw mat in the corner, hands behind his head. Cut to a close up of Iroh's profile. The camera suddenly zooms in as his eyes open wider. Iroh begins to do a series of sit ups, grunting as he does so.

The scene cuts to a shot of Piandao's castle, located on top of a large bluff. Cut to Sokka at the front gates. He grabs a knocker and taps it against the large door a few times. He waits a moment and looks around, but there is no answer. Sokka knocks the door and waits again. Still receiving no answer, Sokka becomes frustrated and grabs both knockers, banging them loudly and frantically. The right door is opened by the butler, Fat, frightening Sokka.)

Fat: (apathetic) Can I help you?

(Cut to a close up of Sokka still looking frightened. He quickly composes himself and assumes a more mannered persona.)

Sokka: I've come to train with The Master.
Fat: You should know The Master turns almost everyone away. (holds his hand out) What did you bring him to prove your worth?
Sokka: Well, uh... (feels around his clothes for something to offer)
Fat: Right. (shakes his head sadly) Let's get this over with.

(Fat gestures for Sokka to enter. Sokka steps through the gate and Fat closes the door. Cut to an overhead shot of the castle courtyard as Sokka and Fat walk towards the main structure of the castle. The camera tilts up to the tallest tower. Cut to a large room with a red carpet and tall windows, giving a view of the valley. Rows of lit candles are places on both sides of the windows. Piandao sits at a small table in front of the windows, his back to the camera. He has dark skin and wears a black cheongsam. Cut to a close up of Piandao's hand holding a calligraphy brush and dipping it into a tray of ink, carefully holding his sleeve with the other hand. His hands move off screen and Sokka and Fat are seen in the background. The camera zooms in on Sokka as he steps forward.)

Sokka: Master, my name is Sokka, and I wish to be instructed in the way of the sword.

(Cut to a shot of Piandao, his back still towards Sokka. His sword is placed next to the table.)

Piandao: Sokka. That's an unusual name.
Sokka: (nervously) Oh, uh, really? Uh, where I come from, The Fire Nation colonies, it's a pretty normal name, for Fire Nation colonials.
Piandao: (writing calligraphy on a piece of parchment) Let me guess. You've come hundreds of miles from your little village where you're the best swordsman in town. And you think you deserve to learn from The Master.
Sokka: Well, actually, I've been all over the world.
Piandao: (knowingly) Yep, here we go.
Sokka: And I know one thing for sure, (gets down on his knees and hangs his head) I have a lot to learn.
Piandao: (glancing back) You're not doing a very good job of selling yourself.
Sokka: I know. Your butler told me that when I met you, I would have to prove my worth. But the truth is...I don't know if I am worthy.
Piandao: Hm, I see. Well, then, (smiles and picks up his sword) let's find out together how worthy you are.

(Sokka looks up as Piandao's shadow passes over him. Cut to a shot of the red carpet the end of Piandao's sword's scabbard strikes the floor. The camera quickly zooms out to a shot of Piandao standing now before Sokka, sword firmly planted before him. Cut to a close up of Piandao.)

Piandao: I will train you.

(Cut to Sokka as a huge smile spreads across his face. Cut to commercial.)



Act II

(The episode returns with a shot of Sokka and Piandao standing in a sword fighting ring in front of the building they were in earlier. Sokka is wearing an almost identical outfit to Piandao's.)

Piandao: The first thing you must learn is that your weapon is an extension of yourself. (unsheathes his word and begins performing a sword form) You must think of it as another part of your own body.
Sokka: Like a second head.
Piandao: Well, more like an extra-long, really sharp arm. The sword is a simple tool, but in the hands of a master it becomes the most versatile of weapons, (sheathes his sword and assumes a stance) and just as the imagination is limitless so too are the possibilities of the sword.

(Sokka smiles excitedly and nods his head in understanding.

The scene cuts to Aang, Toph, Katara, Appa, and Momo in the countryside. Cut to an overhead shot of Aang, Top, and Katara lying on their backs in a circle. Momo runs up to them and lies down next to Katara. Appa is sleeping under the makeshift roof.)

Aang: What should we do today?
Toph: I'm tapped out. I already picked my toes, twice.
Aang: Twice?
Toph: The first time was for cleaning, but the second time's just for the sweet picking sensation.
Katara: Sokka's been in charge of the schedule. I'm not sure what we should be doing.
Toph: (picking her nose) Plus, it's so hot today.
Aang: (jokingly) How hot is it?
Toph: I don't know. Real hot?
Katara: It's so hot, it's so hot... Momo is shedding like Appa. (pets
Momo and flicks tufts of fur from her fingers) Huh, huh?

(Aang scratches his head and Katara's joke receives no laughs. Cut back to the overhead shot.)

Aang: I guess the jokes don't run in the family.
Katara: Oh, everyone's a critic.

(Appa grunts in response.

The scene cuts to a shot of Iroh hanging upside down and doing crunches, panting with effort. Cut to a shot of his feet as he hangs from the over head bars. Cut to and zoom out from a wide shot of Iroh doing the upside down crunches in his cell.

The scene shifts to Piandao and Sokka standing in front of a table inside the building. On the table is calligraphy stationary.)

Piandao: The warrior practices a variety of arts tokeep his mind sharp and fluid. (flattens out a piece of paper on the table) The first
you will learn is calligraphy. Write your name.

(Piandao delicately hands a brush to Sokka, who takes it, messing the bristles up with his thumb.)

Sokka: (skeptical) Writing my name will make me a better swordsman?
Piandao: (takes the brush and positions it correctly in Sokka's hand) When you write your name, you stamp the paper with your identity. You must learn to use your sword to stamp your identity on a battlefield.(holding his sleeve, Sokka dips the brush into the ink and prepares to write his name) Remember, you cannot take back a stroke of the brush, or a stroke of the sword.

(Sokka hand quivers and he sweats nervously, the brush barely an inch above the paper. He scratches his head and places the tip of the brush on his chin, thinking hard about what to do.)

Piandao: You are getting ink on your face.
Sokka: I am? (looks at the brush) I am. So this is about putting my identity on the page, right?

(Piandao nods. Cut to a close up of Sokka. He smiles and the camera zooms out as he proceeds to brush the ink over his face. The camera tilts down as Sokka presses his face onto the paper and rolls his head around. Sokka picks up the paper and shows it to Piandao, smiling cheerfully. On the paper is a large inkblot which vaguely resembles a face. Piandao simply closes his eyes in response.

The scene cut to a shot of the main building. The camera tilts down to show Sokka and Fat facing off in the sword fighting ring, both wearing training equipment and holding wooden swords. Piandao sits at the top of the steps leading to the building, watching. Fat wipes his nose as he waits for Sokka to make a move. Sokka lunges at Fat and thrusts his sword. Fat effortlessly parries the attack and knocks the sword from Sokka's hands. Sokka runs away in fright and Fat chases after, whacking him in the rear with the wooden sword.

Cut to a shot of the sky. The camera tilts down to a blindfolded Sokka being guided through the countryside by Piandao.)

Piandao: Landscape painting teaches a warrior to hold the lay of the land in his mind.

(Piandao stops Sokka turns him to face left and pulls off the blindfold.)

Piandao: In battle, you only have an instant to take everything in.

(Cut to a close up of Sokka rubbing his eyes. The camera rotates around to his front as his eyes grow wide and he smiles with excitement and amazement. Cut to a shot of Sokka and Piandao, their backs to the camera, standing before a majestic view of a mighty river flowing into a series of waterfalls that drop into a canyon. Cut back to Sokka. Piandao grabs his head and turns him away, making him sit in front of a table with a piece of paper, paint, and paint brushes.)

Piandao: Now, paint it.

(Sokka gapes in disbelief. He turns to look at the waterfall, but Piandao turns his head back.)

Piandao: And no peeking.

(Piandao walks away as Sokka takes a brush and begins to paint the intricate view. Cut to a wide shot of the landscape. The camera pans right, towards Piandao and Sokka. Fade to a shot of Piandao's back, the camera tilting up, then to his front, his eyes closed in silent meditation.)

Sokka: I'm finished.

(Piandao opens his eyes and looks at Sokka. Cut to a shot of Sokka presenting a very childish and colorful drawing of the landscape, which bears little resemblance, including a rainbow and a sun with a smiling face.)

Piandao: You added a rainbow.
Sokka: (worried) Is that ok?

(Piandao sighs and shakes his head. Cut to the main building. The camera tilts down to Sokka and Fat in the sword fighting ring with the training gear. Sokka thrusts forward and he and Fat begin their practice fight. Sokka fares much better than before. He grunts as he parries a strike and attempts to swing his wooden sword down, but is distracted.)

Piandao: Sokka.

(Sokka looks over to Piandao, giving Fat the opportunity to circle behind him and kick him in the back, causing a slightly painful fall to the ground.)

Piandao: Concentrate on what you're doing.

(Sokka frowns and drops his head, giving Piandao a half hearted thumbs up. Cut to a wide shot of Piandao's castle. The camera tilts down to Sokka and Piandao walking to the top of a stairway leading down to an empty, tiled area. A small statue of a lion turtle comes into the foreground.)

Piandao: Rock gardening teaches the warrior to manipulate his surroundings and use them to his advantage.

(Cut to a close up of Sokka. He places a hand on his chin and thinks carefully.)

Sokka: Hm, manipulate them to my advantage. Oh!

(Piandao watches as Sokka runs down the steps. Cut to a shot of Piandao. A look of worry comes over him and the camera quickly zooms out to show Sokka rolling a huge stone across the ground. Sokka groans at the strain of it. Cut to a shot of a sheet of moss lying on a rock. Sokka appears from behind and examines its texture before taking it and running back to the other side of the area. Sokka throws the moss on the huge stone and then lays down on it, sighing in relaxation. The camera quickly zooms out to a shot of Sokka lying on the easy chair he made from rocks and moss. Cut to a shot of Fat walking up from behind Piandao. Fat suddenly gasps in shock. Cut to a shot of stones scattered all over the tiled floor, creating a mess. Sokka waves at Fat.)

Sokka: Hey, would you mind grabbing a cold drink for me?

(Fat gasps and turns to Piandao.)

Piandao: I'll take a slice of lemon in mine, please.

(Fat groans in resignation, hangs his head, and walks off to fetch the drinks. Cut to Sokka and Fat dueling in the sword fighting ring again, Piandao sitting in the foreground. Sokka and Fat thrust and parry a few strikes. Sokka swings his sword in a circle and tries to hit Fat's leg, but Fat pulls his leg up and he avoids the attack. Cut to a close up of the two from behind Sokka. The scene goes into slow motion as Fat swings his sword and Sokka parries it. Sokka returns the strike and is also parried. The camera cuts to behind Fat as Sokka continues his offense with four quick thrusts. Fat blocks all the attacks and tries to attack Sokka. He misses, and Sokka uses this opportunity to slip the blade of his wooden sword under Fat's hand and fling the wooden sword from it. Fat is shocked and raises his hands in defeat as Sokka thrusts his sword forward and places the blade on the side of Fat's neck, ending the duel. Sokka steps away from Fat, puts his hands together and bows to Piandao, while Fat frowns angrily at him. Cut to a shot of Piandao sipping a drink from a cup with a slice of lemon stuck on it.

The scene cuts to a shot of the outside of the Fire Nation prison and zooms in. Cut to the inside of Iroh's cell and zoom in on Iroh doing push ups on his knuckles, clapping his hands together at the apex of each push. Cut to a shot of Warden Poon sitting and eating a piece of bread. He hears the clapping and goes to investigate. Cut to Iroh continuing to do push ups. Cut to Warden Poon walking towards the door to Iroh's cell. Cut to a shot from inside the cell of him looking in through the barred window in the door.)

Warden Poon: What's going on in there?

(Cut to a shot of Iroh sitting against the wall and lazily clapping his hands side to side with a delirious expression. Cut back to Warden Poon.)

Warden Poon: Crazy old man.

(Warden Poon leaves. Cut back to Iroh. He claps a few more times and smiles when he is sure the warden is gone, ceasing his clapping and pushing back the stray hair hanging over his face. The scene cuts to a far shot of the Avatar group's campsite near the river. Cut to a shot of Aang and Katara sitting around a map of the Fire Nation.)

Katara: So where are we going next? (pointing to the map) We're starting from here.
Aang: (pointing at a different spot) No, we're over on this island.
Toph: (lying down) You noodle-brains don't know what you're doing. I miss Sokka.
Katara: Ooh, I got one. If you miss him so much, why don't you marry him?

(Katara grins at her joke. The camera quickly zooms out and a groan is heard in the background. Toph rolls over on her side, away from Katara. A winged insect buzzes in front of Aang, who simply blows it away with a quick blast of wind from his breath.

Cut to a shot of the sword fighting ring in front of the main building at Piandao's castle. The camera tilt's down to Sokka and Piandao sitting on the ground.)

Piandao: You've had a good first day of training.
Sokka: I have? But I thought I messed up every single thing we worked on.
Piandao: You messed things up in a very special way. You are ready for a real sword.
Sokka: (excited) Are you giving me one of yours?
Piandao: No.

(Sokka groans disappointedly and slumps down.)

Piandao: Your sword must be an extension of yourself. So tomorrow, you will make your own sword.

(Cut to and zoom in on Sokka. He immediately perks up and grins. Cut to commercial.)



Act III

(The show returns to a shot of a rack of swords. Weapons are hung all about the room. The camera pans left to Sokka and Piandao standing at a table. On the table are several bricks of steel.)

Piandao: Choosing the correct material is the most important step in crafting a sword. You must trust your steel with your life. Choose carefully.

(Sokka takes two bricks and weighs them in each hand. Sokka sets them down and takes another brick. He sniffs it and then bites the brick to test its quality. Sokka puts the brick down and puts a hand to his chin thoughtfully. An idea comes to his mind and he turns to Piandao.)

Sokka: Master, would it be possible for me to leave and bring back a special material for my sword?
Piandao: I wouldn't have it any other way.

(Piandao smiles at Sokka. Cut to Aang, Katara, Toph and Appa all asleep and sitting around the map as they were before. Toph suddenly sits up.)

Toph: Sokka's coming!

(Aang and Katara wake up, gasping and smiling excitedly. Cut to a shot of Sokka walking up to the top of the hill.)

Sokka: Hey, guys. What are you doing?

(Aang, Katara, and Toph all jump at Sokka and give him a group hug.)

Aang: Sokka!
Toph: You're back.
Katara: We missed you so much.
Aang: Say something funny.
Sokka: Funny how?

(Aang and Katara both laugh heartily.)

Sokka: What's their deal?

Toph: I don't know. They missed you or something. I didn't care. (turns away, blushing and smiling)
Sokka: Thanks. That warms my heart. Anyway, I need some help.

(Cut to a shot of the gang running over to the edge of the crater created the night before. Cut to a shot of the group, their backs to the camera, as they stare at the meteorite at the bottom of the crater.

The camera zooms in on the meteorite before cutting to an overhead shot of Iroh sitting in his cell, looking through the bars in the ceiling. Cut to a close up of Iroh's eyes. They are closed for a brief moment, then open. Iroh leans forward and puts his head on the floor. The camera cuts to a shot of Iroh's legs rising into the air and tilts down as Iroh stands on his hands. Sweating heavily, Iroh begins to perform hand-stand push ups.

The camera zooms out, and the scene cuts to a shot of Sokka, Aang, and Katara pushing the meteorite up the slope to Piandao's castle. Toph is behind the meteorite, pushing it forward with her earthbending. Fade to an overhead shot of the group and the meteorite at the large doors. Sokka runs to the doors and bangs both knockers frantically. Piandao opens one of the doors almost immediately and steps out.)

Piandao: Who's this?
Sokka: Oh, these are my friends. Just other good Fire Nation folks. (Piandao bows to them) Do you think we can make a sword out of a meteorite?

(Piandao lays a hand on the meteorite and examines it.)

Piandao: We'll make a sword unlike any other in the world.

(Cut to a shot of a fiery forge. The camera zooms out and turns left to Sokka bare-chested and shoveling coal into it, then to Piandao and Fat, who is carrying a large sledge hammer. The camera cuts and tilts up to a shot of Sokka holding a chisel against the meteorite while Fat hammers it, Piandao watching in the back. Cut to a shot of Sokka tapping the chisel with a smaller hammer. A piece of the meteorite breaks off and falls to the floor. Sokka takes a moment to wipe the sweat from his brow. Cut to a shot of a wooden filled with the meteorite fragments. Fat takes the bucket and the camera follows him as he brings it over to the forge. Sokka is seen working the bellows diligently. The camera zooms in as Katara and Aang peer in at Sokka from around the corner.

Fade to a shot of the bucket sitting in the fires of the forge. Cut to a shot of Sokka holding his legs to his chest, asleep. He wakes up and looks behind him at the forge. He stands up and resumes shoveling in coal. The camera zooms out to show Piandao observing Sokka from outside. Fade to a shot of the bucket being pulled from the forge by iron tongs by Sokka. He carefully positions the liquid space metal over a mold of a blade and pours it in. Cut to a shot of the red hot metal being hammered against a stone. Piandao raises the hot blade and looks carefully at it. An excited Sokka can be seen behind him. Cut to a shot from inside a trough of water as Piandao dips the blade in. The blade makes the water bubble and boil as it hisses and cools, turning black.

Fade to a shot of the outside of the main building, the camera tilting down to the open doors. Cut to a shot of the inside. Sokka is seated in front of Piandao. Aang, Katara, and Toph sit behind Sokka while Fat stands behind Piandao, holding Sokka's sword.)

Piandao: Sokka, when you first arrived, you were so unsure. You even seemed down on yourself. But I saw something in you right away. I saw a heart as strong as a lion turtle, and twice as big. And as we trained, it wasn't your skills that impressed me. (Fat kneels to Piandao and gives him the sword) No, it certainly wasn't your skills. (Sokka looks down in shame) You showed something beyond that. (unsheathes the sword, showing its black blade) Creativity, versatility, intelligence... these are the traits that define a great swordsman. And these are the traits that define you. (sheathes the sword, kneels and gives it to Sokka) You told me you didn't know if you were worthy, but I believe that you are more worthy than any man I have ever trained.

(Cut to a shot of the sword in Sokka's hands. The camera tilts up to Sokka as he lowers his head in shame.)

Sokka: I'm sorry, Master. You're wrong. I am not worthy. I'm not who you think I am. I'm not from the Fire Nation. I'm from the Southern Water Tribe. (Aang, Katara, and Toph all gawk at Sokka with shock and disbelief) I lied so that I could learn swordsmanship from you. I'm sorry.

(Sokka holds his sword up for Piandao to take. Cut to a close up of Piandao frowning and turning away.)

Piandao: I'm sorry, too.

(Piandao quickly turns back around and swings his sword at Sokka. Sokka stands and avoids the attack, using his sheathed sword to block a thrust from Piandao. Aang, Katara, and Toph get up and go to help Sokka, but he raises his hand to stop them.)

Sokka: No, this is my fight, alone.

(Cut to a close up of Piandao before cutting to Iroh's cell. Warden Poon enters, carrying a tray of food. The camera pans right to a close up of Iroh.)

Warden Poon: You used to be the pride of The Fire Nation. Our top general. The Dragon of the West. Now, look at you. (drops the food to the floor. Iroh grabs a green fruit from behind the bars) Look what you've become.

(Iroh watches the warden leave and stands up. He puts the fruit to his mouth and holds it in his teeth as he begins to untie his belt. His shirt comes off and a thick, folded sheet that had been covering his belly falls to the floor. The camera tilts up to reveal Iroh's new, incredibly buff physique. Iroh takes the fruit from his mouth and bites into it. He jumps up and grabs a bar above with one hand. Iroh takes another bite of the fruit and begins doing one handed pulls ups.

The scene cuts to a shot of Sokka and Piandao squared off in the sword fighting ring. Aang, Katara, Toph, and Fat watch from the upper part of the main building. Cut to and zoom in on Sokka, ready with his black sword. Cut to a shot of the tip of Piandao's sword pointed at the ground. The camera tilts up to him, his other hand raised and pointed. The others watch nervously. Cut to a panning right close up of Sokka, then to a panning left close up of Piandao. Piandao lunges forward and begins his attack, striking four times. Sokka deflects the blows and stabs at Piandao.

Piandao moves his head out of the way and stabs at Sokka, who sways back and avoids the attack; Piandao sweeps his sword at Sokka's legs, but Sokka jumps over it and lunges at Piandao, thrusting his sword forward. Piandao deflects Sokka's blade and hits him with the butt of his sword's hilt. Sokka is knocked back several feet and slides over the floor. Sokka flips himself backward and grabs a post of a small bridge to regain his balance. He quickly climbs onto the post and leaps to the other one just as Piandao thrusts his sword at him. Piandao spins around and tries to slice Sokka's foot, but Sokka jumps away to the other rail of the bridge. Piandao stabs at Sokka again, but Sokka jumps off the rail and rolls to the side. Piandao strikes again, but Sokka rolls under the blade. Sokka blocks Piandao's next strikes as he gains distance and hop back on the railing. Sokka leaps away to the end of the bridge as Piandao swings his sword at him.)

Piandao: Excellent! Using your superior agility against an older opponent...smart.

(Piandao charges at Sokka again, striking at Sokka and pushing him up a large stone stairway. Sokka blocks all of the attacks, but the force pushes him against the wall of the stairway. He deflects a thrust from Piandao upward, then ducks as the blade slices through the part of the wall above his shoulder. Piandao swings his sword around his head and body in two large circles. Sokka barely dodges Piandao's blade, cart wheeling to the right. Sokka spins back around, hops a foot off the ground and pushes off the wall with his legs, propelling himself forward, sword extended. Piandao deflects the attack and Sokka rolls across the stair to the other wall, climbing to the top.)

Piandao: Good use of terrain...fighting from the high ground.

(Sokka swings at Piandao below him, who parries and swings at Sokka. Piandao thrusts his sword at Sokka, who pins the blade under his own blade, weighted down under his feet. Piandao tries to wrench his sword free, but can't. He leans forward and pushes his sword upward, throwing Sokka off. Sokka grunts as he stumbles back into a tall stalk of bamboo. Cut to a shot of Toph, Aang, and Katara all wincing at the sight. Cut back to Sokka as he looks up fearfully, strands of hair falling over his face. Piandao raises his sword and charges at Sokka.

Sokka ducks as Piandao slices the bamboo just above his head. He runs off into the bamboo thicket, slicing through as many surrounding stalks of bamboo that he can. As Piandao chases after, the stalks all begin to fall. Piandao skillfully cuts through the bamboo. Sokka desperately runs through the bamboo and turns, grabbing a stalk and pulling it. He lets it go just as Piandao catches up, causing the bamboo to whip back at Piandao. Piandao cuts through the stalk and begins to strike at Sokka, who deflects and runs off again, grabbing two bamboo stalks.)

Piandao: Yes, use your surroundings. Make them fight for you!

(Sokka lets go of the stalks. They whip around at Piandao, who slices through them. Cut to a shot of Sokka running out of the bamboo and back towards the sword fighting ring, screaming in terror and Piandao not far behind. The camera shifts to Sokka's front. He is very frightened and takes a look behind, but Piandao has run off to the side and out of sight. By the time Sokka looks ahead, Piandao is already in front of him and pokes his sword out in front of Sokka, trying to make him run into it. However, Sokka leans back.

The scene goes into slow motion and the camera cuts to an overhead close up of Sokka sliding under the blade. The scene comes back to normal speed as Sokka stands back up and stumbles forward, stabbing his sword into the ground to stop his fall. Using his momentum, Sokka swings his sword back around, flinging dirt and dust at Piandao. The scene goes into slow motion again and the camera cuts to a close up of Piandao as the dirt hits him in the face, blinding him. The scene comes back to normal speed as Piandao spins around and positions his sword behind his back to defend any sneak attacks. Cut to a close up of Piandao trying to blink the dirt out of his eyes.)

Piandao: Very resourceful.

(Piandao turns his head and listens for any sounds. Sokka nervously raises his sword defensively. He then slowly tries to sneak away, careful not to make any noises that would give away his location. Unfortunately, Sokka steps on a lone twig on the ground, snapping it. Piandao turns his head towards Sokka when he hears it. He twirls his sword around into an offensive position and charges forward. Sokka takes a step back as Piandao closes in and stabs at him. Sokka parries the attack, but Piandao catches Sokka's blade with his own. He pushes Sokka's sword around in two circles and flings Sokka's sword out of his hands. Sokka watches as the sword stabs into the ground several feet away.

The scene then goes into slow motion as Piandao swings his sword in large, horizontal arc at Sokka. Sokka is not cut by the bade, but is instead hit in the chest by Piandao's arms, knocking him on his back. Sokka looks up fearfully as Piandao turns and points his sword at Sokka's head. Aang, Katara, and Toph all jump from the building to the ground and run towards Sokka and Piandao. Cut to a close up of Piandao. The camera zooms out as he swings his sword away from Sokka, halting Aang, Katara, and Toph.)

Piandao: Excellent work, Sokka.

(Cut to a shot of Sokka squinting at Piandao curiously. Cut to a shot of Piandao with Aang, Katara, and Toph in the background. He raises his hand and the camera tilts up slightly as he signals to Fat. Fat flings the scabbard of Piandao's sword towards him. Still blinded, Piandao turns and points his sword upward, letting the scabbard fly right onto the blade.)

Piandao: I think I'm a little old to be fighting the Avatar.

(Cut to a shot of Aang, Katara, and Toph in their bending stances. They come out of their stances and look at each other in surprise.)

Aang: How did you know?

(Cut to a shot of Piandao and Sokka. Sokka stands back up as Fat walks on screen carrying a drink and a white cloth.)

Piandao: Oh, I've been around a while. You pick things up. (wipes the dirt off his face with the cloth) Of course, I knew from the beginning
that Sokka was Water Tribe. You might want to think of a better Fire Nation cover name. Try "Lee." There's a million "Lees" (sips his drink).
Katara: But why would you agree to train someone from the Water Tribe?
Piandao: The way of the sword doesn't belong to any one nation. Knowledge of the arts belongs to us all. (gives his sword to Fat. He pulls Sokka's sword out of the ground and gives it back to Sokka) Sokka, you must continue your training on your own. If you stay on this path, I know that one day you will become an even greater master than I am.

(Cut to a shot of Aang, Katara, and Sokka all smiling warmly. Cut back to Sokka and Piandao as they bow to each other. The scene cuts to a wide shot of the group leaving Piandao's castle through the front gates. Cut to a closer shot of the group from the front. Fat is running up to them from behind.)

Fat: Wait. (everyone turns to him) The Master wanted you to have this, as something to remember him by.

(Cut to a close up of Fat giving a small, brown bag to Sokka. They all bow as a farewell and Fat walks back to the castle. The camera zooms in as Sokka opens the bag and pulls out a white lotus Pai Sho tile.)

Sokka: It's a Pai Sho tile.

(Cut to a close up of the tile in Sokka's hands.)

Aang: The white lotus. Hm.
Katara: What does it mean?
Sokka: I have no idea. (Fat is seen in the background closing the doors. Sokka and Aang look back and the camera zooms in on the doors, clearly showing a lotus design on the doors surrounding the Fire Nation symbol) Ooh, that reminds me. Toph, I thought you might like this since you've probably never had a chance to bend space earth before.

(Sokka pulls from his pocket a chunk of the meteorite used to make his sword. Cut to a close up of the black space earth as Toph takes it.)

Toph: Sweet. Check this out.

(Cut to a close up of the space earth floating between Toph's hands. She shapes it into a swirl, a star, and then a splatter shaped similarly to the Nickelodeon logo. Cut to a shot of the group as they walk off down the trail.)

Katara: You know, I don't think there's such a thing as "space earth." If it's from space, then it's not really earth.
Sokka: Must you ruin everything?
Katara: I can't believe I missed you.

(Cut to a wide, overhead shot of Piandao's castle and the Avatar gang walking away. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence includes clips from "The Awakening" and "The Headband".]



Act I

(After the preview, the episode opens with the front of a ship and a calm sea. Suddenly, a giant Sea Lion bursts through the surface with a shrill cry. The shot pans out to reveal the Sea Lion is pulling a Fire Nation Ship. Ty Lee and Azula are visible on deck)

Ty Lee: I'm so excited to spend the weekend on Ember Island. (Cut to a close shot of Azula and Ty Lee standing on the deck, with Zuko and Mai sitting in the shade nearby) It's gonna be great to hang out on the beach and do nothing.

(Ty Lee rests her hands behind her head and closes her eyes with a satisfied smile. Cut to shot of Zuko and Mai sitting on cushions under a red canopy)

Zuko: Doing nothing is a waste of time. (Zuko stands up) We're being sent away on a forced vacation. (Zuko walks over to the balustrade, leans on it and stares out to sea) I feel like a child.

(Cut to close shot of Azula)

Azula: Lighten up. So dad wants to meet with his advisors alone... without anyone else around. Don't take it personally.

(Cut to shot of all four teens)

Ty Lee: (gestures at Azula) Doesn't your family have a house on Ember Island?
Azula: (turns toward Ty Lee) We used to come every summer when we were kids.
Ty Lee: (enthused) That must've been fun!

(Cut to close shot of Zuko looking out to sea. Mai sits looking at him in the background)

Zuko: That was a long time ago.

(Cut to shot of a coastline. The camera pans inland to reveal small docks and extravagant stilted Fire Nation beach bungalows. The camera rests on a small dock where two twin figures stand. The Fire Nation Boat enters the shot moving toward this dock. Cut to a quick close up shot of all four teens gazing out at the approaching Island. Cut to a shot of Li and Lo standing on the dock. Cut to a wide shot of the four teens standing on the boat with Li and Lo waiting in the foreground to greet them. Cut to close shot of Li and Lo.)

Li and Lo: Welcome to Ember Island, kids.

(The camera pans upward from Li and Lo's dock to a small shabby beach cottage. Cut to a shot of the four teens looking displeased and skeptical. Cut to the camera panning upward through an ornate tropical room. The camera rests on a green curtained doorway through which Li/Lo steps. Cut to close shot of Azula walking skeptically into the room followed by Ty lee. Cut to rear shot of the entire party entering the room. Cut to close shot of Zuko and Mai standing together, ornate trinkets in the foreground.)

Zuko: It smells like old lady in here.
Mai: (sarcastically, looking toward Zuko) Gee, I wonder why.

(Cut to shot of Ty Lee looking at a painting of two young twins, twins standing back to back in a symmetrical seductive pose. Li and Lo approach her.)

Ty Lee: Who are these two beautiful women?

(Cut to close shot of the painting in question, the camera quickly zooms out to include Li and Lo standing on either side of the painting)

Li and Lo: Can't you tell (The elderly twins strike the identical seductive pose from the painting.) It's Li/Lo and me.

(Cut to close shot of the elderly twins rear ends touching in the foreground, while the four teens stand looking on, confused and slightly disgusted, in the background. Zuko covers his mouth to prevent himself from getting sick. Cut to an above shot of a Maroon printed bead spread. Ty Lee lies back on to the bedspread.)

Ty Lee: (snuggling against the pillow) Ooh, I love this seashell bedspread!
Mai: (Cut to shot of Mai) Are you serious? It looks like the beach threw up all over it.

(Cut to wide shot of the entire room, Ty Lee is still snuggling her seashell bed spread in the foreground. The other three teens stand listening to Li and Lo.)

Li: We know you're upset that you were forced to come here this weekend. But Ember Island is a magical place. (Cut to close profile shot of Li.) Keep an open mind. (The camera slowly pans around her face to reveal her twin standing next to her.)
Lo: Give it a chance...
Li and Lo: ...and it can help you understand yourselves and each other. (Cut to shot of Li grabbing one of the smooth stones resting on table. Cut to wide shot from above. Li passes the smooth stone to her sister.) The beach has a special way of (Close shot of Lo rubbing the smooth stone) smoothing even the most ragged edges. (Cut to shot of teens. Ty Lee joins the group and Azula yawns. Cut back to shot of Lo and Li. In an identical series of motions, they clap and strip off their robes, revealing their elderly bodies in swimwear.) Time to hit the beach! (Cut to shot of Mai covering Zuko's eyes.)

(Cut to the camera panning upward over rocks, revealing a crater filled with water at the top.)

Toph: (voice over) Aang, I know swimming is fun and all, (wide shot of Toph, Katara, Sokka and Aang lounging around the water.) but do you really think you should be exposing yourself like that (Close shot of Toph.) Cover up!

Aang: (Cut to Aang floating through the water, Momo curled up on his chest) What? I'm wearing trunks.

(Cut to shot of Toph sitting on the rocks in the background, while Katara wades in the water in the foreground.)

Toph: I know...it's your tattoos (raises arms in frustration) I'm worried about. What if someone sees you?
Katara: (turning toward Toph) There are walls all around us. It's completely safe.

(Cut to shot of Aang floating toward us, Momo suddenly perks up and Aang turns to notice something ahead and smiles. Cut to shot of rapids and a tunnel ahead of them. Aang floats into the shot and propels himself down the tunnel.)

Aang: (Shot of Aang speeding down through a water-slide like tunnel. Momo is firmly latched on Aangs head as they speed through the twists and turns.) Whoo, hey! (The camera pans over to reveal more of the rock water slide and Aang whizzing through it. Cut to close shot of Aang still riding the water slide tunnel and laughing. Cut to outside shot of a Fire Nation Officer 1 lounging on some rocks, fanning himself, while Fire Nation Officer 2 uses his sword handle to clean between his toes in the foreground.)

Fire Nation Officer 1: This has got to be the most boring job in the fire nation. (Cut to shot of Fire Nation Officer 2 smelling his sword handle.) Nothing ever happens. (Fire Nation Officer 2's face fills with shock. Simultaneously, in the background Aang is yelling and falling down a waterfall into a basin of water. Officer 2 turns to look toward the splash, and then ducks down.)

(Cut to wide shot of the scene. The two fire nation officers lie on their stomachs behinds some rocks near their posts, peeking toward the waterfall where Aang just landed. Cut to shot of the waterfall. The shot is a circle framed in black, as though someone is looking through a telescope. Aang pops out of the water, into view. Momo is still clinging to his head.)

Aang: (to Momo) Let's go again! (Momo looks hesitant. Aang air bends out of the water springing back up the rocks. The telescope-like camera follows his springing motion up the cliff till he disappears over the other side. Cut to shot of the two Fire Nation Officers huddled cheek-to-cheek, sharing one telescope and shaking with fear. They duck back down and face one another.)

Fire Nation Officer 1: The Avatar's alive! We better send a messenger hawk to the Fire Lord.

(Shot of Fire Nation Officer 1 opening a hawk's cage. The hawk wears a Fire Nation Symbol on his chest and steps down on to the Officer's arm. Cut to shot of the back of the hawk. The hawk has a Fire Nation message tube strapped to his back. Fire Nation Officer 1 places a sealed scroll of parchment into the Hawk's tube and closes the lid. Cut back to the front of the Hawk, the camera zooms out as the hawk flies at the camera and then out of the shot.)

Fire Nation Officer 2: A black ribbon message. (Cut to wide shot of the two Officers. Officer two stands up in excitement and the Hawk flies into the distance.) This is so exciting!

(Cut to a wide shot of a black crescent shaped coastline, surrounded by green flatland cliffs. The camera pans right. The beach is scattered with people and red and yellow beach tents. There are some smaller beach bungalows, as well as some larger, more magnificent properties interspersed around the cliff face. Cut to shot of a kid holding a skim board. He throws it on to the wash and rides toward the camera. Cut to shot of Azula, Ty Lee, Zuko and Mai walking along the beach, through crowds of beach-goers. Mai and Zuko share an umbrella. Cut to close shot of Mai and Zuko. Cut to shot of two young boys building an elaborate sand castle. Suddenly, a foot comes down and crushes their castle. Cut to shot of Azula looming triumphantly over the caste she has just crushed, Ty Lee stands next to her smiling.)

Young Boys: (Cut to wide shot of the group of teens and the two boys scampering away in fear) Ahh! (Azula kicks their sand pale after them)

(Shot of Ty Lee standing somewhat confused with a large pink beach bag over her shoulder. A gawky young fire nation teen boy springs into view.)

Fire Nation Teen Boy 1: (eager) Hey, you need some help unpacking?

Ty Lee: Sure, thanks.

(Ty Lee dumps her enormous bag into the teens awaiting arms, knocking him to the ground. Cut to shot of Teen Boy 1 crouched by the bag, unpacking. He quickly throws every item out one at a time, lastly pulling out Ty Lee's pink towel. Cut to wide shot of him smiling and laying the towel out with a flourish as Azula looks on in the foreground. He hastens to make her towel perfectly straight as Azula turns away in jealousy. Cut to shot of Ty Lee from above, squinting into the sun.)

Ty Lee:Could you scooch just a little bit more to the... (Cut to shot of Teen Boy 1 standing confused and then quickly moving to block out the sun for Ty Lee. Cut back to Ty lee.) Perfect. (She winks)

(Cut to shot of Mai and Zuko huddled together under an umbrella. A small child runs by laughing. Shot of Zuko looking to the side at a seashell, which he picks up. Shot of Zuko handing the shell to Mai)

Zuko: Here... (Bringing the shell toward her) This is for you.
Mai: Why would I want that?
Zuko: I saw it and I thought it was pretty. Don't girls like stuff like this?
Mai: (turns away from him) Maybe stupid girls.
Zuko: (throws the shell away in anger) Forget it!

(Cut to shot of shell landing next to a robust Fire Nation Teen boy. Cut to wide shot of Fire Nation Teen Boy 2 surveying the beach. The camera quickly zooms in on Ty Lee who is still be shaded by Fire Nation Teen Boy 1. Cut to close up slow motion shot of Ty Lee flipping her hair and laughing as sparkles twinkle around her. Cut back to shot of Fire Nation Teen 2 gawking stupidly and then blushing and smiling. Cut to shot of Fire Nation Teen Boy 1 patiently shading Ty Lee and smiling. Suddenly Fire Nation Teen 2 crouches in front of him and presents the Shell discarded by Zuko and Mai to Ty Lee.)

Ty Lee: (Close Shot of Ty Lee taking the Shell) Wow, thanks. This is so pretty.
Fire Nation Teen Boy 2: (Back to shot of Fire Nation Teen 2 crouched in front of Fire Nation Teen) Not as pretty as you are. (Fire Nation Teen 1 looks angry)
Fire Nation Teen Boy 1: (Fire Nation Teen 1 moves to the side to get a closer look at the shell) That shell's not so great!
Ty Lee: (Cut to close shot of Ty Lee with sun in her eyes) Ahem, shade... shade!

(Cut to shot of Mai still sitting under an umbrella, Zuko walks up holding two ice-cream cones and joins her under the umbrella.)

Zuko: (Close shot of the two of them) I thought since it's so hot... Here. (He hands her an ice cream cone, but the scoop of ice cream falls off the cone into Mai's lap)
Mai: (She looks down at the ice cream) Thanks. This is really refreshing.

(The camera points upward at the sky. A Fire Nation girl flies forward toward a ball and hits it with her hand. Cut to wide shot of Fire Nation teens playing volley ball in a circular court. The camera pans back to show Azula looking on in the foreground. Cut to close up shot of Azula's face, she smirks menacingly.)

Azula: (cut to wide shot of the beach, Azula stands looking at the game, Mai and Ty Lee sit under the umbrella behind her. In the background Ty Lee is being fanned and worshipped by three Fire Nation Teen Boys) Hey, beach bums, we're playing next. (The camera zooms in on Ty Lee) Ty Lee, get over here now!

(Ty Lee rolls off her towel into a handstand and walks over on her hands, smiling. Cut to shot of Zuko, standing up suddenly and throwing off his shirt. The wind blows his hair and a flock of birds fly by dramatically in the background. Cut to shot of four Fire Nation teen girls cooing, giggling and blushing over Zuko, as little pink hearts float upward behind them. Cut to a wide shot of the beach and the volleyball players. The camera pans left across the scene. Cut to an upward shot of Azula, Mai, Ty Lee and Zuko huddled together)

Azula: See that girl with the silly pigtails? (Azula and the others look up toward the volleyball players, cut to shot of a pig tailed Fire Nation Teen girl kicking the ball around) When she runs towards the ball, there's just the slightest hesitation of her left foot. I'm willing to bet a childhood
injury has weakened her. (Camera Zooms out to show Azula, Mai, Ty Lee and Zuko are now playing volleyball as a team on one side of the net, the pig tailed girl and her team are on the other side) Keep serving the ball to her left and we'll destroy her, (cut to close shot of Azula looking menacing) and the rest of her team. (Cut to shot of Azula and her team huddled together) Dismissed!

(The camera pans at ground level across the group of volley ball players. Cut to Azula who throws the ball up toward the sun and then launches it toward the other team, who miss it completely. Zuko slides for the ball and kicks it up into the air. Azula runs toward it, spins around and smacks it toward the pig-tailed girl. The pig-tailed girl dives but misses the ball completely. The ball flies over a crowd of Fire Nation teens and lands next to two Fire Nation Teen boys, Ruon Jian and Chan, who now notice the game. Cut to shot of Ty Lee
zooming through the air toward the ball. She kicks it and then lands like a tight ropewalker on the net. Cut to shot of the Ruon Jian and Chan looking amused. Cut to Shot of Mai running toward the ball and hitting it with her knee. Cut back to Ruon Jian and Chan looking even more amused and impressed. Cut to wide shot of the court. Azula runs up Zuko's back, propelling herself into the air, kicking the ball with all her power. The ball zooms toward the ground catching flame. Cut to wide shot of the beach and the volley ball court. The ball lands in a fiery explosion, setting fire to the net.)

Azula: (Cut to close shot of Azula through the volley ball net, which is on fire. She looks sinister. The camera zooms closer and closer) Yes, we defeated you for all time! You will never rise from the ashes of your shame and humiliation! (Cut to Azula standing with her team, she turns casually toward them) Well, that was fun.

(Azula and her team are joined by Chan and Ruon Jian. They approach Ty lee.)

Chan: I'm having a party tonight. (Camera turns toward Ruon Jian and Chan) You should come by.
Ty Lee: (turning toward them) Sure...I love parties!

(Camera cuts back to a close shot of Ruon Jian and Chan.)

Ruon Jian: (indicating Mai) Your friend can come, too.

(Cut to shot of Ty Lee smiling innocently. The camera pans out as Azula approaches them.)

Azula: What about me and my brother? (Crossing her arms in displeasure) Aren't you going to invite us? (cut to shot of Ruon Jian and Chan, who look at one another skeptically) You don't know who we are, do you?
Chan: Don't you know who we are? We're Chan and Ruon Jian. (Gives a cool smile)
Ruon Jian: Yeah.

(Cut back to shot of Azula and Ty Lee looking pleased as Zuko walks forward, fists clinched angrily. Azula puts her arm out to stop him. The camera cuts back to Chan and Ruon Jian.)

Chan: (with a raised eyebrow) But fine, you're invited. Just so you know though, some of the most important teenagers in the Fire Nation are gonna be at this party so...try and act normal.

(Cut to close shot of Azula smiling in an evil manner, as her friends stand behind her in the background.)

Azula: We'll do our best.



Act II

(The scene opens with a quick shot of the Li and Lo's small beach house and dock. It quickly cuts to Lo, Li, Zuko, Azula, Mai and Ty Lee all sitting around a hexagonal table on the balcony outside. They are eating an elaborate meal.)

Zuko: Why didn't you tell those guys who we were?
Azula: I guess I was intrigued. (Cut to shot of Azula sitting next to Ty Lee) I'm so used to people worshipping us.
Ty Lee: They should.
Azula: Yes, I know, and I love it! But for once, I just wanted to see how people would treat us if they didn't know who we were.
Li and Lo: (The camera pans slowly one of the twins faces) Like waves washing away the footprints on the sand, (Shot of Zuko and Mai eating and leaning against one another) Ember Island gives everyone a clean slate. (Cut to wide shot of the entire scene) Ember Island reveals the true you. (The twins both stand up and clap twice. They then raise one arm in excitement) To the party!

(Cut to shot of the Fire Nation messenger hawk flying over a river canyon. The camera cuts to show the front of the hawk as a large Raven Eagle moves in behind it. Cut to a close shot of the Raven Eagle's face. The pans out and follows the Raven eagle as it swoops down and ties a black ribbon around the messenger hawk. The camera cuts to a wide shot of the scene, as the hawk plummets toward the ground, and the Raven Eagle flies down after it. Cut to a ground shot of the messenger hawk struggling as the Raven Eagle removes the scroll tied to it's back and flies away.

Cut to a shot of the Raven Eagle landing on a metallic arm, the camera pans right to reveal the arm belongs to Combustion Man. He removes the scroll from the Raven eagles beak and holds it out in front of him, covering the shot with paper. An ember appears in the middle of the paper, slowly burning the paper from the middle, outward. Combustion Man's face looks menacingly out through the hole in the burning paper.

Cut to shot of a large stilted mansion on the Cliffside of Ember
Island. Cut to a shot of a hand tapping and ornate gold knocker on a large wooden door. The door opens to reveal Chan looking displeased.)

Chan: Um... You're a little early. No one's here yet.

(Cut to shot of Azula, Ty Lee, Mai and Zuko standing before Chan's doorway, waiting to be let in.)

Azula: I heard you telling someone you'd be partying from dusk till dawn. (looks out at the horizon) It's dusk so we're here.

(Cuts back to Chan in the doorway)

Chan: But that's just an expression.

(Cuts back to Azula)

Azula: We are the perfect party guests. We arrive right on time because we are very punctual. (Azula makes a chopping motion with her left hand, hitting her right hand as she says 'punctual')
Chan: (Cut back to Chan. He shrugs and gestures for them to come inside. Cut to shot of a large entryway, with a large table covered with food at the center.) All right, listen, My dad's an admiral. He has no idea I'm having this party, (cut to close shot of Chan) so don't mess anything up.

(Cut to shot of Azula looking menacing. The zooms out to show both Azula and Chan standing next to one another.)

Azula: That's a sharp outfit, Chan...careful, (close shot of Azula, looking intense and somewhat crazy) you could puncture the hull of an Empire-Class Fire Nation Battleship, leaving thousands to drown at sea... (Azula points at his outfit) because it's so sharp.

Chan: Um... (Chan points less enthusiastically at Azula) Thanks.

(Shot of Azula with an enthusiastic smile, which quickly turns to a frown as Chan walks away. Shot of Ruon Jian combing his hair in a mirror. He sees Azula and her company walking by in the background. He turns toward them.)

Ruon Jian: Hey, first ones here, huh?
Zuko: (cut to shot of Zuko and Mai walking side by side) Pft. He thinks he's so great. (to Mai) Well, what do you think of him? (they stop walking)
Mai: I don't have any opinion about him. I hardly know him.
Zuko: You like him, don't you?

(Mai sighs and walks away, as Zuko looks angrily in the direction of Ruon Jian. The camera zooms in on Ruon Jian)

(Cut to shot panning upward, over a scene of food and Fire Nation Teens talking. Cut to close shot of Fire Nation teen boy 2 talking to Fire Nation teen boy 3)

Fire Nation Teen 2: So how do you know Ty Lee?
Fire Nation Teen 3: I met her at the beach today. She was pretty impressed by a sand pagoda that I made for her.
Fire Nation Teen 1: (bursts into the shot) Well, I met her first.

(Cut to above shot of Ty Lee being cornered by a gaggle of Fire Nation Teen boys, eager to impress her)

Ty Lee: Look, it doesn't matter who I met first 'cause I like you all.

(Cut to shot of Ty Lee's point of view, as the boys lean in even closer to her)

Fire Nation Teen 2: But which one of us do you like?
All: Yeah. Tell us.

(Cuts back to Ty Lee, who looks confused and gestures for everyone to back-off)

Ty Lee: I don't know, I don't know.

(Ty Lee does a series of punches as kicks. Cut to ground shop of the huddle of boys, as they slowly fall toward the ground after being knocked out by Ty Lee. Ty Lee cartwheels through her newly cleared path. Cut to scene of Azula standing angrily in the corner as Ty Lee approaches her.)

Ty Lee: Oh, I'm glad you're here. Those boys won't leave me alone. I guess they all just like me too much.
Azula: Come on, Ty Lee, you can't be this ignorant.
Ty Lee: (Close shot of Ty Lee, confused) What are you talking about?
Azula: (Cut back to Azula, leaning coolly against a wooden beam) Those boys only like you because you make it so easy for them. You're not a challenge. You're a tease. It's not like they actually care who you are. (Cut to Ty Lee, bursting into tears. She covers her eyes. Cut to wider shot which includes Azula, who grabs Ty Lee's hands in a comforting gesture) Ok, ok, calm down. I didn't mean what I said. (Close shot of Azula) Look, maybe I just said it because I was a little... (whispers) jealous.

(Cut back to Ty Lee)

Ty Lee: (surprised) What? You were jealous of me? (gestures toward herself) Um, but, you're (gestures toward Azula) the most beautiful, smartest, perfect girl in the world.
Azula: (turns away from Ty Lee) Well, you're right about all
those things. (The camera pans across the room full of teen boys) But for some reason when I meet boys they act as if I'm going to do something horrible to them.
Ty Lee: (laughs) But you probably would do something horrible to them. (Azula turns back toward Ty Lee, looking a bit sad) I'm sure they're just intimidated by you. Ok, look, if you want a boy to like you just look at him (close shot of Ty Lee) and smile a lot and laugh at everything he says, even if it's not funny.

(Cut back to Azula)

Azula: (Looks down) Well, that sounds really shallow and stupid. (Looks up grinning) Let's try it.

(Cut to Azula and Ty Lee. Ty Lee leans against a wooden beam, posing coolly and pretending to be a boy)

Ty Lee: Ok. "Hey, there sweet sugar cakes. (points coolly toward Azula) How ya likin' this party?"
Azula: (laughs loud and unnaturally, drawing the attention of everyone at the party)

(Cut to close shot of a few teen boys looking bewildered. Cut to shot of Mai and Zuko sitting together on a bench. Mai's arms are crossed and she looks displeased.)

Mai: I'm bored.

(Fire Nation Teen Boy walks across the shot, holding a tropical drink.)

Zuko: I know.
Mai: I'm hungry.
Zuko: So what?
Mai: So, find me some food.
Zuko: Sure. (gets up and walks away)

(Shot of Chan talking to a Fire Nation teen girl. Azula approaches them)

Azula: Chan, I'm ready for a tour of the house.

(Chan hands his drink to the Fire Nation teen girl and gestures for Azula to follow him. Azula places her drink on the same Fire Nation teen girls head, The drink starts to steam in the Fire Nation girl's anger. Cut to Chan and Azula walking out on to a balcony.)

Chan: Is this your first time on Ember Island?
Azula: No, I used to come here years ago.
Chan: (The Camera pans over Azula and Chan leaning on the balcony) It's a great place if you like sand. (Azula forces and enthusiastic laugh) Yeah, it's like, (Chan, encouraged, stands up and gestures to the ocean) "Welcome to Sandy Land." (They both laugh. Chan, looking please, comes and stands right next to Azula))
Azula: Your arms look so strong.
Chan: Yeah, I know. (Flexes, and then kisses Azula. Cut to close shot of Chan.) You're pretty.

(Cut to close shot of Azula.)

Azula: Together, you and I will (camera rotates right as Azula quickly
stands and raises her arms toward the sky) be the strongest couple in the
entire world. (The torch behind Azula turns blue and the balcony is filled with a menacing blue light) We will dominate the Earth! (Blue fire balls burst from Azula's hands)

(Cut to Chan who is in complete shock. A bird comically flies behind him and a large sweat drop appears on his forehead. He shakes himself out of it.)

Chan: Uh... I gotta go.

(He smiles awkwardly, and scoots out of the shot. Cut to Chan comically scooting his way around the balcony and back in to the party as Azula is left alone. Cut to Azula looking confused. Cut to Zuko preparing a plate of food. A shot from above shows him walking through the crowd of party guests. One of them accidentally knocks his plate to the ground with an over-zealous gesture. Cut to shot of food smashing to the ground)

Zuko: (Shot of Zuko yelling angrily at the boy who accidentally knocked the plate) Hey, watch it! That food was for my cranky girlfriend. (Points in the direction of Mai)

(Cut to shot of Ruon Jian leaning over Mai. Zuko rushes toward them angrily and pushes Ruon Jian away from her. Cut to shot of Ruon Jian straightening his hair.)

Ruon Jian: Whoa. What are you doing?
Zuko: (close-up shot of Zuko, angry) Stop talking to my girlfriend!
Ruon Jian: (Ruon Jian approaches Zuko) Relax, it's just a party. (Zuko pushes Ruon Jian hard, sending him flying across the room, breaking a giant vase.)
Mai: (Mai stands up and grabs Zuko's shoulder. He turns towards her.) Zuko, what is wrong with you?!
Zuko: What's wrong with me?!
Mai: (angrily) Your temper's out of control. You blow up over every little thing. You're so impatient and hot-headed and angry.
Zuko: Well, at least I feel something...as opposed to you. You have no passion for anything. (raising his arms is the air) You're just a big "blah".
Mai: (turning away from him) It's over, Zuko. We're done.

(Cut to shot of Chan running over to the broken pieces of vase on the floor.)

Chan: Who broke my Nana's vase? (Ruon Jian points at Zuko. Chan runs over to Zuko and gestures for him to leave immediately.) That's it, you're out of here.
Zuko: (close- up shot of Zuko) I was just leaving.

(Cut to shot of Zuko walking away. Ruon Jian, Chan and Mai stand in a row behind him)

Ruon Jian: Have fun by yourself, loser boy.
Chan: (Chan looks at Ruon Jian and smiles) Nice.

(Cut to shot of Zuko walking out the door alone and slamming it shut behind him.)



Act III

(The scene opens with a wide shot of Zuko walking down the beach. Cut to a closer shot of Zuko's profile. His head is bent down. Cut to a shot of Zuko walking around some rocks and then looking upward. Cut to a shot of a large Fire Nation mansion nestled in the mountain face. Close up shot of Zuko as looks upward and then heads toward it. He stops and then looks out at the sea.

A flash and a golden scene appears, with a man and two small children running happily through a field. A flash and we are back to Zuko staring at the sea. He continues his assent.

Cut to a close up shot of Zuko walking. A flash and another golden scene appears. This time it is a close up shot of young Zuko looking happy. Someone has their arm around him. Another flash and Zuko is standing before the doorway to the mansion.

He starts toward the doorway. There is flash and again a golden scene of a man holding a baby in the air next to a small boy building a sandcastle by the sea. Everyone looks happy. Another flash and we see Zuko approaching the doors to the mansion. Cut to a close shot of Zuko pulling at the door, but it is locked. He kicks it open. In a wide shot the camera pans around dusty great room. Zuko walks up another set of stairs and stands before a family portrait. Cut to a close up shot of the family portrait of Fire Lord Ozai, Ursa, Azula and Zuko sitting together. Cut to a close shot of Zukos face and to a close shot of Ozai's face in the portrait. The camera pans down the painting to young Zuko, who sits at his father's side.

A flash and a golden scene of young zuko looking out at the sea, with his father's arm on his sholder. Another flash and a quick shot back to present day Zuko. Cut to the Portrait. The camera pans over it and rests on Ursa's face. Another flash and a golden scene of Ursa happily playing with a baby Zuko. Another flash and a shot of present day Zuko walks toward us. Cut to a shot of his hand picking up a circular piece of concrete with a babies hand stamped in it. Zuko puts his own adult hand on top of the small print. Cut to wide shot of Zuko standing alone in the great hall.

Cut to a wide shot of a crater filled with water. Cut to a closer shot of Appa, Aang, Toph, Sokka and Katara sleeping near the water. Cut to a close up shot of Combustion Man's metallic boots stomping nearby. Cut back to a close shot of Toph with Momo under her arm. Both of them are fast asleep. Toph's eyes suddenly open, waking up Momo. Cut to wide shot of Toph sitting up, her companions waking up behind her.)

Toph: Guys, you're all gonna think I'm crazy, but it feels like a metal man is coming.

(Cut to shot of Aang looking sleepy. Suddenly, a bright light shines in his eye, making him squint. He rubs his eye and looks toward the light source. Cut to a wide shot showing the light source is coming from Combustion Man, who stands at the top of the crater's cliff. Cut to a close up shot of combustion man's metal arm, which is causing moonlight to reflect toward Aang. Cut to an above shot of Combustion Man and the gang below. Cut to a close shot of Combustion Man's fore head tattoo. Next a wider shot of Combustion Man's whole face. He growls and breathes inward.

Cut to a shot of Aang, looking scared and running forward. Cut to a close shot of Combustion Man's stomach, sucking inward as he breathes in deeply. Cut to a close shot of a beam of some sort comes out of Combustion Man's forehead. A wide shot shows the beam headed straight toward Aang. It hits a nearby cliff and explodes.

Aang and the others are blown backward in the explosion. Toph steadies herself and in a wide shot is shown bending a large herd of rocks toward Combustion Man. Combustion Man shoots another beam destroying the rocks and creating an explosion right in front of Toph. Katara attempts to stop his next explosion with water bending, but her efforts are turned into a cloud of steam. Appa roars. Cut to shot of Combustion Man standing in the great steam cloud.

Cut to wide shot of the Mansion on Ember Island. Cut to shot of Azula, approaching the mansion. Zuko is sitting on the steps holding his childhood handprint.)

Azula: I thought I'd find you here.

(Cut to shot of Zuko's profile looking at his small handprint, Azula stands in the background)

Zuko: Those summers we spent here seem so long ago. So much has changed.
Azula: (she gestures down the steps) Come down to the beach with me. (she starts down the steps) Come on, this place is depressing.

(Zuko follows her and the camera pans down to the handprint, left alone on the porch. Cut to wide view of the camera panning down Ember Island Beach. Zuko and Azula are walking side by side toward Mai and Ty Lee. Close shot of Zuko looking toward Mai and then looking away. Close shot of Mai looking angry and a bit sad.)

Mai: Hey... (Interrupted)
Zuko: (close shot of Zuko) Where's your new boyfriend? (Mai turns away angrily. Zuko comes and sits next to her) Are you cold? (he puts his arm around her, but she slaps it away)
Ty Lee: I'm freezing.
Zuko: (close shot of Zuko smiling) I'll make a fire. (The camera pans upward toward the cliffside and then the mansion) There's plenty of stuff to burn in there.

(Cut to close-up shot of Combustion Man's forehead. He growls and the camera zooms out to a full body shot, as he shoots another beam from his forehead. Cut to a shot of the beam flying through a cloud of steam toward some rocks and exploding.

Cut to the Aang and his friends hiding behind a rock, crouched and covering their heads for the explosion. They sit back up.

Sokka: This is crazy! How can we beat a guy who blows things up with his mind?
Aang: (Aang crawls forward) We can. Jump on Appa. I'll try to
distract him.

(Aang runs into the cloud of steam and disappears. The camera pans upward and Aang emerges from the top of the cloud and springs up the cliff face. Another beam explodes next to Aang. Cut to a shot of Aang jumping down the other side of the cliff, the orange cloud from the explosion still behind him. Aang slides down the back of the cliff into a field full of rock pillars.

Cut to a shot of Combustion Man running. Cut back to Aang running through the pillars. He chooses one and hides behind it. Combustion Man slides down the back of the cliff face toward Aang. Cut to a shot of Aang breathing hard, his back to a pillar. The camera pans right as he peeks around the pillar and sees Combustion Man. Combustion Man sees him and stops. He shoots a beam toward Aang. Cut to an above shot. Aang's pillar explodes. He runs toward another one but it also explodes. Cut to another shot of the field of pillars. Aang bounces from pillar to pillar, stopping behind one. He earth bends the pillar toward Combustion Man, but it explodes before hitting him. Another beam is directed toward Aang. In slow motion he bends a wall of air around the explosion and is sent flying backward. Cut to a shot of Aang flying through the night sky. He turns and punches through an on-coming pillar of rocks.

Cut to a wide shot of Combustion man running though the field of pillars. He stops where Aang should have landed and looks around. Cut to a close shot of Combustion Man's forehead. Combustion Man walks by a pillar of rocks. The camera zooms in to reveal Aang is hiding inside the wall of rocks, with only his eyes visible. Combustion Man stops and takes another look at Aang pillar. Aang burtst through covered in rock armor. Cut to wide shot of an explosion and Aang is sent flying into the air. As he falls back downward toward the earth, Appa flies into the shot and picks up Aang. Cut to shot of everyone on Appas back. Katara holds Aang tightly.)

Aang: (out of breath) I'm ok. (Momo jumps on to Aang's back)
Toph: Well, that was random.
Katara: I don't think so. I get the feeling he knows who we are. (looks at Aang)

(Cut to close shot of a fire. Zuko's family portrait is thrown into the flames. The camera closes in on young Zukos picture as it burns to ashes. Cut to shot of Zuko standing over the fire as Ty lee sits nearby.)

Ty Lee: What are you doing?
Zuko: What does it look like I'm doing?

(Cut to above shot of Zuko's legs next to the fire and the burning family portrait. The camera pans upward.)

Ty Lee: But it's a painting of your family.
Zuko: You think I care?
Ty Lee: (voice over) I think you do.
Zuko: You don't know me, so why don't you just mind your own business! (He turns away from her)
Ty Lee: (Close shot of Ty Lee, who looks down and speaks softly) I know you.

(Cut back to shot of Zuko and Ty Lee by the fire)

Zuko: No, you don't. (he waves his arm angrily) You're stuck in your little Ty Lee world, where everything's great all the time.

(Cut to shot of Mai sitting on a rock near the fire. Zuko looks toward her)

Mai: Zuko, leave her alone.
Zuko: (mocking) 'I'm so pretty, look at me. I can walk on my hands, whoo!' (Zuko does a hand stand. Cut to shot of Ty Lee looking sad. Cut back to Zuko who is upside down. He lets himself fall to the sand) Circus freak!

(Cut to shot of Ty Lee beginning to cry and Azula sits in the background)

Azula: (laughs)
Ty Lee: Yes, I'm a circus freak. Go ahead and laugh all you want. (gestures toward Azula, who looks away) You wanna know why I joined the circus?
Azula: Here we go.

(Cut to an above shot of the four teens around the fire)

Ty Lee: Do you have any idea what my home life was like, growing up with six sisters (cut to shot of Ty Lee) who look exactly like me? (she stands up) It was like, I didn't even have my own name. (she falls to the ground crying) I joined the circus because I was scared of spending the rest of my life as part of a matched set. At least, I'm different now. (close shot of teary-eyed Ty Lee) Circus freak is a compliment!
Mai: (sarcastically) Guess that explains why you need 10 boyfriends, too.

(Cut to shot of Ty Lee looking angrily toward Mai and putting her hands on her hips)

Ty Lee: I'm sorry, what?
Mai: Attention issues. You couldn't get enough attention when you were a kid, so (looking downward) you're trying to make up for it now.

(Cut to shot of Ty Lee, who moves closer and closer to Mai with each accusation)

Ty Lee: Well, what's your excuse, Mai? You were an only child for 15 years, but even with all that attention, your aura is this dingy, pasty, gray...

(Cut to shot of Mai and Ty Lee)

Mai: I don't believe in auras.

(The camera pans right, towards Zuko. Zuko stands up)

Zuko: Yeah, you don't believe in anything.

(Cut to close shot of Mai who looks depressed)

Mai: Oh, well, I'm sorry I can't be as high-strung and crazy as the rest of you.

(Cut to over-head shot of the four teens. Zuko walks closer to the fire and Mai.)

Zuko: I'm sorry, too. I wish you would be high-strung and crazy for once, (Close shot of Mai looking away and Zuko standing over her) instead of keeping all your feelings bottled up inside. She just called your aura dingy. Are you gonna take that?
Mai: (Cut to wide shot of the four of them. Mai lays back carelessly on the rock she is sitting on) What do you want from me? You want a teary confession about how hard my childhood was? Well, it wasn't. (close shot of Mai) I was a rich only child who got anything I wanted. As long as I behaved...(cut to shot of the clouds above) and sat still...and didn't speak unless spoken to. (cut to shot of Zuko listening) My mother said I had to keep out of trouble. (Cut to wide shot of the four of them around
the fire) We had my Dad's political career to think about.
Azula: Well, that's it, then. (close-up shot on Azula) You had a controlling mother who had certain expectations, and if you strayed from them you were shut down. That's why you're afraid to care about anything, and why you can't express yourself.
Mai: (close shot of Mai) You want me to express myself? (she stands and yells) Leave me alone!

(The camera pans right, over the four teens. Cut to shot of Mai's face angry in the foreground and Zuko in the background)

Zuko: I like it when you express yourself. (he reaches for her, but she backs away)
Mai: (yelling)Don't touch me. I'm still mad at you.
Zuko: My life hasn't been that easy, either, Mai. (Mai interrupts him)
Mai: Whatever- that doesn't excuse the way you've been acting.
Ty Lee: Calm down, you guys. (cut to Ty Lee and Azula sitting behind her) This much negative energy is bad for your skin. You'll totally break out.
Zuko: (angrily) Bad skin? (Ty Lee cringes. Cut to shot of Zuko looking toward her) Normal teenagers worry about bad skin. I don't have that luxury. My father decided to teach me a permanent lesson on my face. (Zuko points toward his scar)

(Cut to shot of Azula, Zuko and Ty Lee)

Ty Lee: Sorry, Zuko, I...

(Zuko walks away from them and the camera follows him)

Zuko: For so long, I thought that if my dad accepted me, I'd be happy. I'm back home, now my dad talks to me. Huh, he even thinks I'm a hero. (cut to Azula, who smiles at these words) Everything should be perfect, right (cut to over-head wide shot of the four teens sitting around the fire) I should be happy now, but I'm not. I'm angrier than ever and I don't know why.
Azula: There's a simple question you need to answer then. (she
leans forward) Who are you angry at?
Zuko: No one, (he looks down) I'm just angry.
Mai: Yeah, who are you angry at, Zuko?
Zuko: Everyone... (he covers his ears in frustration) I don't know.
Azula: Is it Dad?
Zuko: No, no!
Ty Lee: Your uncle?
Azula: Me?

(Cut back to shot of Zuko who shakes his head in frustration)

Zuko: No, no... No, no.
Mai: Then who? Who are you angry at?

(The camera quickly pans right, stopping on Azula)

Azula: (sternly) Answer the question, Zuko.
Ty lee: (pleading) Talk to us.

(Cut to shot of Zuko looking confused and frightened)

Mai: Come on, answer the question.
Azula: Come on, answer it.

(Cut to wide shot of group. For a moment there is silence)

Zuko: (yells suddenly) I'm angry at myself!

(Zuko throws his arms down and the campfire bursts into a column of flame. The girls cover their eyes to protect themselves from the fire. Cut to a close shot of Zuko as wind and embers fly through his blowing hair. The fire burns out and the scene grows dark. Cut to a wide shot of the group)

Azula: Why?

(Cut to shot of Zuko looking out at the sea with Azula sitting behind him)

Zuko: Because I'm confused. Because I'm not sure I know the difference between right and wrong anymore.
Azula: You're pathetic.

(Cut to shot of Zuko. His back is turned toward us as he looks out to sea. Mai approaches him and puts her arm around him.)

Mai: I know one thing I care about... (Cut to shot of Mai smiling at Zuko) I care about you. (Mai and Zuko kiss. Azula claps, causing them to separate and turn toward Azula. The camera pans left to include her.)
Azula: (still clapping slowly) Well, those were wonderful performances, everyone.
Zuko: I guess you wouldn't understand, (pulls Mai to him) would you, Azula (sarcastically) Because you're just so perfect.

Azula: Well, yes, I guess you're right. I don't have sob stories like all of you. I could sit here and complain how our mom liked Zuko more than me, but I don't really care. (Cut to shot of the burning embers left from the fire) My own mother...(cut to shot of the embers reflected in Azula's eyes) thought I was a monster. (cut to Mai and Zuko. Then to Ty Lee, who looks on concerned. Cut back to a wide shot of the whole group, Azula sitting in the center of the shot) She was right, of course, but it still hurt.

Ty Lee: What Lo and Li said came true. The beach did help us learn about ourselves. (Cut to close shot of Ty Lee. She picks up a smooth stone) I feel all smoothed. I'll always remember this.

(Cut back to wide shot of the group.)

Azula: You know what would make this trip
really memorable?

(Close shot of Azula looking devious.

Cut to shot of Chan opening the door of his house. The party is still going on behind him. He looks very confused. Cut to Azula and her companions waiting to be let in.)

Azula: We've got some bad news, Chan.

(The camera zooms in on Zuko's face as he turns toward Chan.)

Zuko: Party's over.

(Cut to an antique vase smashing on the floor. Cut to Zuko kicking a table full of food in half as party-goers run away screaming. Close shot of Chan full of fear. Cut to Mai who throws a knife down a wall cutting five tapestries in half. Cut back to Chan who is still in shock and looks up suddenly. The camera pans upwards to where Ty Lee is crouched in the rafters. She swings down and pulls down two chandeliers which come crashing to the floor. Cut to shot of Chan sobbing with Azula standing behind him. Her arms crossed and she looks pleased. Cut to a final blurred shot of Azula, Ty Lee, Mai and Zuko linked arm in arm very pleased with themselves. A wall of flame right behind them.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(The scene begins with Roku emerging through a wall of fire. He is speaking to Aang through a dream.)

Roku: Aang, it's time you learned my history with Fire Lord Sozin. You need to understand how the war began, if you want to know how to end it. Meet me on my home island on the day of the summer solstice.

(The dream changes, and an island in the Fire Nation with two volcanoes is now shown.

The scene cuts to Aang, asleep on Appa. He rolls over onto his side.)

Aang: (talking in his sleep) Okay, Roku.

(The scene cuts to Zuko. He is in his room, sleeping on his side. Footsteps can be heard in the hallway outside his door. The sound wakes him and he rushes to the hall to investigate. As he opens the door, he sees a mysterious cloaked figure disappear down the hall. As Zuko gazes down the hall, a strong breeze blows through the drapes of the hall. Zuko starts off after the figure but is distracted by a scroll placed upright in the hall. Surprised, Zuko picks up the scroll and begins to read.)

Zuko: (speaking aloud) You need to know the story of your great-grandfather's demise. It will reveal your own destiny.

(Zuko closes the scroll. Intrigued, he stares down the hallway. The drapes are still rustling. The scene cuts to a view from the opposite end of the hallway. The camera focuses on Zuko, still standing outside his bedroom, drapes still rustling from the breeze.

Cut to a bright blue, cloud filled sky. A very large cloud moves quickly forward. Cut to the inside of the curious cloud. Appa and Aang are shown inside the cloud. Aang, positioned on the neck of Appa, bends the elements around Appa to create a cloud of camouflage. His arms move quickly around his body in a circular motion. Katara and Sokka look over Appa's saddle for a better look. The island is unnervingly desolate.)

Aang: There it is. That's Roku's home.
Katara: (confused) But there's nothing here.

(Toph jumps from Appa's saddle. Once her feet hit the ground, she solemnly tells Katara and the gang what she can see with her unique vision.)

Toph: (somberly) Yes, there is. An entire village. Hundreds
of houses. (A strong breeze moves a layer of ash along the ground, brushing past their feet.) All completely buried in ash.

(The scene changes to show an amazing Fire Nation City, surrounded by walls that appear to have been made by waves of lava. Cut to a large and impressive hall, full of paintings of Fire Nation Royalty. Zuko stands before one of the portraits. Azula passes by Zuko, and makes a suggestion.)

Azula: It's never too early for a sitting with the court painter, Zuko. (sarcastically) Make sure he gets your good side.

(Zuko, glints away from his sister, clearly upset with his sister's off color comment. Suddenly his face changes. He turns to speak to her as she continues down the hall.)

Zuko: Wait. I need to ask you something. What do you remember about our Great-Grandfather's history?
Azula: (sighs) Ah, Zuko. (The camera angle changes to an overhead view of the hall, the siblings, and the majestic paintings.) It's so strange how your mind works. (The camera focuses on Sozin's portrait. It slowly pans up from the bottom of the painting. It rest's on Sozin's face, a comet arching in flight over his head. Azula continues to tell Zuko Sozin's history.) Fire Lord Sozin began the war, of course. He spent his early years secretly preparing for it, but he was as patient as he was clever. He famously waited for the comet, later renamed Sozin's comet, and used its power to launch his full-scale invasion of the world. (The camera angle changes. The siblings are shown, standing side by side, looking up at the painting, Azula finishes the story.) In the end, he died a very old and successful man.
Zuko: (confused) But how did he die?
Azula: Didn't you pay any attention in school, Zuko? (Azula begins to
walk away. She walks off camera as she finishes her sentence.) He died peacefully, in his sleep. He was ancient.

(Zuko stares, his face furrows in frustration. Cut to Roku's island. The gang is shown, from a distance. They are sitting on the tip of a hardened wave of lava. Cut to Aang from the back. He is facing the ocean which is ablaze in gold and orange as the sunsets. Aang is meditating. His arrows glow, and he is shown sitting atop a mountain top in an alternate reality, possibly the Spirit World. He is surrounded by an ocean of clouds. Roku's dragon flies into the shot. He flies in behind Aang, who is now standing. Roku smiles gently, and a breeze tussles his white hair and beard. The scene cuts. Zuko is in his room, laying on his back on his bed. He rolls over on his side and stares at the puzzling scroll. He picks up the scroll and reads it to himself again.)

Zuko: (frustrated) What does it mean? (Annoyed, he tosses the scroll aside. It lands on his bedside lantern. The light from within the lantern shines through the parchment. It reveals a secret message on the scroll. Zuko gasps and grabs the scroll from atop the lantern. He reads aloud.) The Fire Sages keep the secret history in the Dragon Bone Catacombs.

(The camera focuses on Zuko's eyes as he finishes reading the
discovered message. Zuko quickly turns to leave. Cut to a dark and ominous temple. It stands stately, bathed in soft red light. Fire Sages walk the grounds. Zuko is hiding and waiting behind a pillar, out of sight. He sees a Fire Sage walking through a courtyard. The courtyard is large. In the middle of the courtyard floor, a large medallion fashioned in the shape of a flower is seen. The Fire Sage stops directly over the ornate medallion on the ground. He crouches low, and delivers a blast of fire into the center of the design.

It begins to open, a hidden passage is under the courtyard of the temple. The Sage disappears into the floor. Zuko sits behind the pillar to wait until it is safe for him to use the secret passage himself. When all is quiet, Zuko goes to the secret passage, and bends a blast of fire into the medallion just as the sage had. The passage opens, and a spiral staircase is revealed along with a very large secret chamber. Zuko travels through the chamber and down a hall lined with what appears to be the bones of dragons, all lined up along the walls of the hall. He then comes to an ornate door with what appears to be a metal sculpture of Fire Lord Sozin on it.

On the chest of the sculpture is a Fire Nation emblem. Zuko places his left hand over the emblem, and delivers a powerful fire blast. The fire fills the door, and pours out from the statue's eyes, nose and mouth. As the door opens, cobwebs pull apart and fall to the side of the door. As Zuko enters the room, he pulls his cloak from his head and raises his lantern to look around the dark chamber. The room is filled with artifacts and various vessels. A large and intricate dragon statue sits in the middle of the room. Under the dragon's head, Zuko finds what he is looking for.)

Zuko: (reading aloud) The final testament of Fire Lord Sozin.

(The scene cuts to Aang reaching for Roku to climb on the back of the dragon.)

Roku: Come, Aang. (The three fly off over the clouds)
Aang: (curious) Where are we going?
Roku: (smiling) To visit my past. Our shared past.

(Aang smiles, and the three fly out of the shot. Cut to the chamber where Zuko sits, reading fervently. While Zuko reads, Fire Lord Sozin's voice is heard. He narrates the following story.)

Sozin: (narrates) As I feel my own life dimming, I can't help but think of a time when everything was so much brighter. (The scene cuts, and we see a lush and green Fire Nation Courtyard. Two young firebenders are sparing. The young men exchange fire blasts in an impressive display of firebending. The two young men are Sozin and Roku.) I remember my friend.

(While they spar, Sozin notices that Roku's feet are too close to a tree root. Sozin smiles, and uses this to his advantage. He steps up his attack to drive Roku back, causing Roku to trip and fall back. As Roku falls, Sozin grabs Roku by the shirt to keep him from falling. While he holds him, he raises his hand as if to fire blast, but instead he lets Roku fall to the ground.)

Sozin: (smiling) Looks like I win again, Roku. (Sozin extends his hand to help Roku to his feet.)

Roku: Are you kidding? (Raises eyebrows, and takes Sozin's hand.) The tree root did all the work. (Roku gets back on his feet, and pats Sozin on the shoulder to praise his clever maneuver.) Nice one, Sozin. (The two young men walk off camera while Roku and Aang watch.)
Aang: (surprised) You were friends with Fire Lord Sozin?!
Roku: Back then, he was just Prince Sozin, and he was my best friend.

(Roku and Sozin leave the courtyard. A lovely young Fire Nation woman enters the scene. As she walks past the friends, Roku stares at her and blushes. Sozin notices.)

Sozin: (nudging Roku) Say something to her.

(Roku walks after the young woman. He raises his hand and attempts to greet her.)

Roku: Uh...ahhh.

(Embarrassed, and overcome by her presence, Roku sighs and puts his hands on his head and falls back onto the ground. Sozin sits down next to him and sprinkle's blades of grass onto Roku's face. Roku and Aang can now be seen in the back, watching Roku's history unfold. The camera closes in on Aang and Roku.)

Roku: Love is hard when you're young.
Aang: You don't have to tell me.
Roku: (puts his hand on Aang's shoulder) Don't worry, It gets better. Now come with me. We have a party to attend. (Cut to a lovely outdoor celebration in a courtyard. Cheerful golden lanterns are strung above a large crowd of Fire Nation citizens. The camera pans down, and we see a large staircase with two figures standing at the top.)
Aang: Wait, whose party is it?
Roku: Sozin and I shared many things, including a birthday.

(The camera now focuses on Roku and Prince Sozin at the top of the stairs. As they walk down the stairs, the camera focuses on two young women in the crowd. One of them is Roku's love interest. She watches Roku, then looks down and blushes. Her friend leans over her shoulder and giggles. Roku has noticed the young woman's interest and blushes while he continues down the stairs. Distracted, Roku begins to fall down the stairs. Sozin acts quickly and grabs Roku by the hand, saving him from falling. Roku, composes himself, and blushes again from embarrassment. Sozin laughs at his love smitten friend. The moment ends quickly, as the crowd suddenly grows quiet. A group of Fire Nation Sages have entered the courtyard. They are walking toward Prince Sozin and Roku. Sozin hurries down the stairs to meet them.)

Sozin: (concerned) Did something happen to my father?
Fire Nation Sage: No, Prince Sozin. We are not here for you. We are here to announce the identity of the next Avatar. (The guests are no longer quiet as whispers travel through the crowd. Cut to Roku and Sozin, both in shock. Cut again to a close up of the sages. The Sages make the announcement, and they bow to respect the new Avatar.) It is our honor to serve you, Avatar Roku.

(Cut to a close up of Roku, standing with his jaw dropped, in disbelief. The camera shows the crowd on the ground, all bowing. Sozin, who is still in shock himself, looks around at the crowd. Then he quickly turns to kneel before Roku. The scene slows fades and ends with Roku still standing at the top of the stairs.)



Act II

(The scene opens with Zuko sitting in the chamber reading. The camera pans down to show him holding the scroll. His lantern still casting an orange glow against his body. Cut to a side close up of his face reading Firelord Sozin's history. As he reads, Sozin's narration is still heard. Fade from Zuko's close up, to a close up of Roku, sitting in his room. He is staring down towards the floor.)

Sozin: (narrates) Soon the day came when my friend Roku had to leave the Fire Nation and face his destiny as the Avatar. He needed to travel the world so he could master the other elements.

(Sozin appears in the doorway of Roku's room.)

Sozin: (leaning against the door frame) Hey, why aren't you packed yet, all-powerful Avatar?

(Roku doesn't move, and continues to stare. The camera focuses on Sozin's face. Sozin looks down, he sympathizes with is friend. Suddenly, Sozin's face perks up.)

Sozin: (smiling) Come on, show me how it's done...(Cut to another view of Roku's room. Sozin leaps in the shot, attempting to demonstrate examples of all the bending disciplines.) using all four kinds of bending. (Sozin ends his routine with a cheerful smile. Cut to an overhead view of Roku sitting on his bed. The camera closes in on him slowly as he speaks.)
Roku: (depressed) I started packing, but then the fire sages told me I won't need any worldly possessions anymore. (Cut to Sozin, who loses his smile, and sits down beside his friend.)
Sozin: (saddened) Oh.

(Cut to a view of Roku and Sozin, sitting next to each other on Roku's bed. There is an open, but empty trunk at Roku's feet.)

Roku: It happened so fast. Everything's going to be different now.
Sozin: (Blinks, and a small smile is seen briefly. He reaches up toward his head dress. He removes it from his topknot, and holds it out towards Roku.) Here. (Cut to a close up of the royal head dress) I hope you're at least allowed to have this.
Roku: But this is a royal artifact. (Cut to a view of the two still sitting, Sozin holding the head dress in his hand.) It's supposed to be worn by the crown prince.
Sozin: (leans in) I want you to have it.

(Roku accepts the gift, and places it around his own top knot. The camera focuses on Roku's top knot as he slides the pin into place, then pans out to show Roku smiling. The two friends stand up, and bow towards one another. Cut to Zuko still sitting on the floor reading. The camera pans out. Cut to a close up of Sokka, Katara, and Toph. Sokka and Katara looked disturbed. The camera angle changes, and we see Aang with his eyes still closed, stand up on the
rock he has been meditating on. Aang crouches down in a peculiar way, and begins to grunt. He appears to be relieving himself. Cut back to the gang. Katara looks alarmed.)

Katara: (disgusted) Do they have bathrooms in the spirit world?
Sokka: (raising his index finger) As a matter of fact, they do not.

(Cut to Aang smiling, still in the peculiar stance. Cut again to Aang riding on the back of Roku's dragon in the spirit world. The camera angle changes to an aerial view of Roku and Aang soaring over the clouds. Aang notices they are on their way to a familiar place.)

Aang: (excited) Hey, we're almost at the Southern Air Temple.
Roku: This was the first stop on my avatar journey.

(The camera angle changes, and the beautiful Patola mountains are shown with the Southern Air Temple in the distance. Fang flies gracefully through the mountain range. Cut to a line of young Air Nomad monks. The camera pans right to show Avatar Roku, at the end of the line. He is annoying a young monk to his right. Roku is airbending his long black hair in the monk's face.)

Roku: It was the place where I was trained to master airbending and also where I met an old friend of yours, Monk Gyatso.

(Gyatso then effortlessly air bends Roku's hair back, causing his hair to tangle. Roku nudge's Gyatso forward. Gyatso is very satisfied and smiles.)

Aang: (surprised) No way.

(The scene changes, and an aerial view of the airbenders on a grassy ledge is shown. An older Air Nomad leads the students in an airbending exercise. He launches off the side of the ledge. The students line up by twos to follow their teacher. Cut to Gyatso and Roku soaring through the air on their gliders.)

Roku: Hey, Gyatso, you want to see a new glider trick? (Roku flies up and loops twice in the air.)
Gyatso: (laughing) Check this out. (Gyatso flips his himself over, and stands on top of his glider. Cut to Roku and Aang, sitting on Fang.)
Aang: (impressed)) He's air-surfing. I can't believe I never thought of that.

(As Gyatso shows off his skill, he loses his balance, and begins to fall through the sky. Roku catches him on the back of his glider. Unfortunately, Roku is unable to control the glider, and the both plummet towards the other young monks who are now back on the grassy ledge. Cut to the other students looking up at the falling airbenders. They panic and try to run to get out of their way. Cut to a side view of Roku and Gyatso, flying low about to crash. They crash off camera, and a large cloud of dust enters the shot. Cut to the young monks knocked over, and scattered about. Roku's hair is in his face. Gyatso air bends it back while Roku lifts his head. They both smile, and Roku pats Gyatso on his shoulder. Cut to a close up of Aang.)

Aang: (smiling) That's amazing. I can't believe you were friends with Monk Gyatso just like I was. (The camera pans out quickly to show Roku.)
Roku: (fondly) Some friendships are so strong, (closes his eyes) they can even transcend lifetimes.

(Fang slowly flies out of the scene with Roku and Aang on his back. Cut to a panoramic view of the North Pole. In the distance, we can see two figures on a plateau of ice. Cut to Roku standing on the table of a small glacier. He is older now. His hair is shorter, around shoulder length. He has chiseled features, and the beginnings of a beard.)

Roku: After my years mastering airbending, I traveled to the Northern Water Tribe. (Cut to Roku's water bending master. His hair is short with familiar beaded dreads of hair around the face. He wears a collar of bone with a blue stone, and a blue water tribe parka. The Water Bending Master commands a large, spiraling water spout from the ocean waters behind him. It curls, turns and twists before finally thrusting forward, knocking Roku, and a fourth of the glacier, into the water.) Waterbending was especially challenging for me. (Cut to a shot of the water.) But in time, I mastered it as well.

(Roku emerges from the water, and bends an enormous wave of water directly at his master standing on the glacier. The blast destroys the glacier, and carries his waterbending master all the way back to the top of the North Water Tribe Temple. His master sits up, and shakes his head to get his bearings. Cut to Roku, standing on an ice float, lowering his stance. A smile of satisfaction sits upon his face.

The scene fades into the next. Roku stands shirtless. From the waist down he wears Earth Kingdom clothing. His hair and beard are longer. He moves his arms in quick strong motions across his body to earth bend a large piece of earth he is riding up the side of a mountain.)

Roku: (narrating) I moved on to the Earth Kingdom. (Cut to Roku racing up the slope, another Earth Bender enters the scene. He is racing Roku. The point of view changes, and we see Roku again, looking at his master as they compete for speed.) My Earthbending master, Sud, was uncompromising, stubborn, and blunt. (The two benders race their landmasses into thick brush and trees. Then, they disappear from view. Cut to a view from the top of the mountain overlooking a valley.) ...and a lifelong friend.

(Sud races into the shot, coming closer to the camera. He quickly brings his landmass to a halt. He thrusts his fists into the air, confidently cheering for
himself. The look on his face changes quickly when he realizes that Roku not only beat him to the top, he also had arrived in enough time to seat himself, and pour them both tea. Sud smiles at his pupil. Cut to a long shot of Roku and Sud. They both raise their teacups to toast. The scene dissolves into a close up of Roku's head dress and slowly pans down to show his face in an extreme close-up.)

Roku: It was bitter work... (The camera pans back to a medium shot of Roku on a beach. He moves his arms to bend the different elements in a display of mastery. He starts by Waterbending to his left, Earthbending to the front, Firebending behind, and Airbending to his right. The camera pans to an aerial view of Roku at the center of the 4 elements he commands.) but the results were worth it. (The scene cuts in a wash of white light followed by a shot of Zuko, still reading Sozin's history in the chamber. An extreme close up shows his eyes quivering with each word he reads.)
Sozin: (narrating) Twelve long years passed before I saw my friend again. When Roku returned, he was a fully realized Avatar, and I had changed as well.

(A wall of flames fade Zuko's shot, into the next. The camera is behind Sozin sitting in his throne room. Roku enters the shot, he walks down a long ornate red carpet towards Sozin.)

Roku: (cheerfully) Sozin, or should I say, Fire Lord.
Sozin: (seriously) Customarily, my subjects bow before greeting me, but you're the exception.

(Aang and Roku watch the scene from across the room.)

Roku: After all these years, he was still my best friend (Fade to a wedding ceremony and celebration in a Fire Nation Courtyard. Many guests are in attendance, even citizen's from other nations. To Roku's right is Sozin who is holding a scroll.) And a few months later,he was my best man.
Aang: (excited) Roku, it's that girl who didn't even know you were alive.

(Roku lifts his brides veil.)

Roku: Don't do this, Sozin. Don't challenge me. It will only end badly. It's over.

(Avatar Roku lowers his eyes in disappointment, and turns to walk away. As he leaves, Fire Lord Sozin becomes filled with uncontrollable rage. He leaps from his throne and bends a deadly blast of fire at his former friend. The POV shows the mighty blasts from Sozin's hands, streaming steadily from his clenched fists.

As the flames lift, and the room can be seen again, Roku is nowhere to be found. Cut to a medium shot of Sozin, still fuming with anger, but clearly concerned about Roku's whereabouts. His eyes shift from side to side, trying to find Roku. Roku breaks through the floor behind him, he had used Earth Bending to sink into the floor to safety. As he emerges, he delivers a mighty blast of air that sends Sozin flying across the room, and slams him into the doors of the throne room. As Sozin drops to the floor, Roku wastes no time Earth Bending a pillar of Earth that lifts Sozin into the air and pins him by the back of his robes to the ceiling. Sozin is helpless. Cut to an extreme close up of Avatar Roku, his face gripped by fury. He calmly brings his hands together in front of his face, and his eyes spark.

The avatar spirit now flows through him. Cut to a long shot of the throne room. He brings the supports of the throne room crashing down. Cut to an aerial shot of the devastation seen from outside of the throne room. Cut to a medium shot of Sozin, uncovering his face to witness the destruction. Roku airbends a cyclone of air, and raises himself up to face Sozin.)

Roku: I'm sparing you, Sozin. I'm letting you go in the name of our past friendship, but I warn you, even a single step out of line will result in your permanent end.

(Sozin stares at Roku, his face unchanged. Suddenly, his expression drops, and he hangs his head in defeat. Roku turns, and rides the cyclone quickly away from Sozin, and out of the shot.)



Act III

(The scene opens to show Roku's island. Cut to a long shot of Roku sleeping peacefully next to his wife in his home.)

Roku: (narrates) Sozin and I didn't speak or see each other for 25 years after our battle. I spent most of my spare time here at my home.

(A loud rumbling whooshing noise wakes Roku. He springs from his bed, and looks out a window. He sees several large fireballs falling from the sky, and crashing into the island. Roku and his wife flee the room. As Roku flees from the room, his headpiece falls to the floor, and is left behind. Roku emerges from the house to find the air saturated with smoke and ash. Coughing, Roku and his wife shield their faces. Ta Min runs towards a corner of the house, away from Roku.)

Roku: (reaches for Ta Min) Let's go.

(Roku airbends a tunnel into the clouds of smoke to help his wife and others escape safely. Cut to a view of the town. Townspeople are running through the streets to escape the waves of smoke and ash that now pour through the streets. Cut to Roku's home. Fang flies up from behind the house. He narrowly escapes as an ashflow completely buries the house. Cut to a wide shot of Roku, with his face covered, leading his wife and many townspeople to safety. Ash continues to fall as we see a swell of lava ooze from the mouth of the volcano.

Cut to a close up of Roku still running. He looks to his wife, the POV changes to Roku's. He let's go of her hand, and motions her to go on without him. With her arm still outstretched, she looks at him, and runs to safety. She continues to look back, desperately hoping Roku will grab her hand. Ta Min runs off camera with many of the townspeople. Avatar Roku turns to face the advancing destruction. He airbends a hug dome of protection around himself. Cut to the townspeople POV of the air dome from the life boats off shore. Cut to a reaction shot of Ta Min, a young man to her right, and a young woman to her
left. They look up, at the catastrophe stricken with fear. Cut to a wide shot of Fire Lord Sozin, watching Roku's island burn from his balcony.)

Sozin: (narrates) Roku's island was 100 miles away. But I could still feel it rumbling and see the black plume of smoke. I had never seen anything like this catastrophe.

(Cut to an aerial shot of the volcano. Large columns of black smoke billow from the summit. Suddenly, lightning strikes above the volcano as the earth rumbles from the disaster. Cut to a close up of a landslide quickly approaching the town, threatening to destroy it completely. Thinking fast, Roku earth bends a gigantic wall, and rides the wall to meet the falling earth, and stop its decline. As he succeeds in stopping one disaster, another appears. The volcano ejects a massive wave of molten lava from its mouth. The flow breeches the wall of earth. Roku runs to the bottom of the summit, and cuts into the earth using his earthbending. He creates a channel to divert the lava into the surrounding ocean, away from the town, and the bay of the island. Cut to a wide shot of the island. The channel fills with lava, and empties into the ocean. Cut to Roku and Aang watching the destruction.)

Aang: (in awe) This is amazing, Roku. You're battling a volcano, and you're winning.
Roku: Unfortunately, my success didn't last, Aang. There was no way I could do it all.

(Cut to Roku surrounded by lava and smoke. He covers his face as lava leaps around him, and toxic gases spout up around him. Roku slowly turns to look up at the top of the volcano. As the camera pans up and focuses on the mouth of the volcano, it violently expels another fire fountain of lava. Roku runs toward the volcano, and leaps into the black sky. He blows a powerful blast of air from his mouth at the rapid lava flow. The blast is so powerful; it causes him to rise in the air. The lava flow cools to rock, and Roku lands on it. Suddenly, a blast of poisonous gas spouts to his right, he turns and covers his face. He turns to the jet, airbending it away. Suddenly lava appears on his right. Another jet of gases blasts to his left, and he quickly air bends it as well.)

Roku: (narrates) Battling the elements was hard enough. I had to do it while I could barely breathe. The poisonous, volcanic gasses were overwhelming.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the sky directly over the eruption. Lightning crashes around the crater as Fang flies into shot. The summit emits another lava fountain. Fang pulls back, narrowly escaping the blast.)

Roku: (covering his face with his arm) It's all right, Fang. Get out of here, I'm fine.

(Roku turns his body from side to side. His movements are strong. When he faces the camera again, Roku's face is fierce and his eyes are aglow, he has entered the avatar state. With a powerful blow from his fist, Roku earth bends a tremor through the volcano, knocking out the entire backside of the crater. This lessens the lava flow that was threatening to engulf the island. As the lava flows down, the second volcano erupts. Roku hopelessly drops his head. Cut to a view of Roku from behind. Sozin, on a blue dragon, enters the shot.)

Sozin: Need a hand, old friend?
Roku: (surprised) Sozin?!
Sozin: There's not a moment to waste.

(Cut to an aerial view of the two volcanoes. Sozin and Roku ride on the blue dragon's back to the second eruption. Cut to a medium shot of Roku bending the fire fountain down into the crater. Cut to Sozin balanced on the mouth of the vent. He helps cool the lava by displacing the heat and channeling it through himself, and out through his other hand into the turbulent sky. The scene pans out to show the silhouettes of the two friends, commanding and controlling the devastation.

Cut to a view of the volcanoes from the POV of the towns people in the boats off shore. Cut to a medium shot of Ta Min. Her face is anxiously fixed on the volcanoes. The scene cuts back to Roku and Sozin on the edge of the crater. Lightning blasts above Sozin. The earth beneath him becomes unstable. He begins to fall back off the side of the volcano. Roku quickly earth bends an earth shelf to catch Sozin. Stable again, Sozin looks to Roku for a moment. Suddenly, the earth violently shakes and another surge of ash and rock shoot from the crater. The two turn to run. )

Roku: Don't breathe the toxic gas.

(As the two run, a jet of toxic gas shoots up directly next to Sozin. Roku quickly air bends it away to protect Sozin. Suddenly gas erupts directly into Roku faces. Roku is overcome and disorientated.)

Roku: (shaking) It's... too much.

(Cut to Roku's POV. He lifts his hands to look at them. They blur out of focus. Overwhelmed by the poisons, Roku begins to buckle and falls to his
knees. He looks up toward Sozin, and holds out his hand for help.)

Roku: (begging) Please...
Sozin: (callously) Without you, all my plans are suddenly possible.

(Cut to a medium shot of Roku. His arm is still reaching out towards Fire Lord Sozin. He listens to Sozin in disbelief as Sozin delivers his death sentence.)

Sozin: I have a vision for the future, Roku.

(Sozin's dragon appears. As Roku kneels, weak and vulnerable, Sozin mounts the dragon and flies away. Cut to Roku, on the side of the volcano. He is surrounded by toxic gas, and behind him a surge of rock and ash flows swiftly toward him. Cut to a wide shot of the black clouds billowing from the island.

Sozin's dragon emerges from the plumes. The camera zooms to an extreme close up of Sozin's piercing amber eye. Cut quickly to Roku, from the back, still on his knees. He is coughing, and is unable to get to his feet. Fang appears from the right, and flies above him. Cut to a close up side view of Roku, he bravely looks up towards his dragon. Cut to a view of the debris, rapidly approaching Avatar Roku. With the avalanche just moments away from swallowing Roku,
Fang flies down, and wraps himself around Roku. The wave of ash and rubble cover the two completely.

Fade to a soothing bright light flooding an arched window frame. A baby's coos can be heard. The camera pans down to show a chubby, smiling infant. Cut to a long shot of three Air Nomads. A nun holds up the baby to the light while the infant's parents stand in the shadows to the right of the nun.)

Aang: (off camera) Who's... wait, that's me, isn't it?
Roku: Make sense of our past Aang, and you will bring peace and restore balance in the world.

(Avatar Roku slowly disappears behind Aang.)

Aang: (calls out) Roku? Roku?

(Slow fade to a wide shot of Sozin's chamber in the Dragon Bones Catacombs. Zuko is still seated on the floor, reading. Cut to a shot of Sozin from the back. He is standing on a balcony, overlooking his soldiers and Fire Nation Navy.)

Sozin: (narrates) With Roku gone, and the great comet returning, the timing was perfect to change the world. I knew the next avatar would be born an air nomad. So I wiped out the air temples. But somehow, the new Avatar eluded me. I wasted the remainder of my life searching in vain. I know he's hiding out there somewhere. The Fire Nation's greatest threat... the last airbender.

(Cut to a shot of the Southern Air Temple, devastated by fire. Slowly a close up of Fire Lord Sozin's eyes appear underneath the destruction. The two images stay in the shot in juxtaposition, and then cuts to a Fire Navy ship sailing through glaciers. Cut to the underside of the ship seen from under the water. The camera pans down to reveal Aang and Appa surrounded by a sphere of ice. The scene fades to a close up of the scroll Zuko has been reading.)

Zuko: (disappointed) That can't be it, where's the rest of it?

(Zuko puts the scroll down, as the camera pans out. Cut to the Fire Nation prison where they are holding Uncle Iroh. Cut to the back of Zuko, slamming the door to the cell behind him as he enters. Cut to Iroh sitting with his head down. His hair is tangled in tendrils that loosely lay about his face.)

Zuko: (shouting) You sent this, didn't you? I found the secret history. Which, by the way should be renamed "the history most people already know." The note said that I needed to know about my great-grandfather's death, but he was still alive in the end.
Iroh: (looks up toward Zuko) No...he wasn't.
Zuko: (irked) What are you talking about?
Iroh: You have more than one great-grandfather, Prince Zuko. Sozin was your father's grandfather. Your mother's grandfather was Avatar Roku.
Zuko: (shocked) Why are you telling me this?
Iroh: Because understanding the struggle between your two great-grandfathers, can help you better understand the battle within yourself. Evil and good are always at war inside you, Zuko. It is your nature, your legacy. But there is a bright side. What happened generations ago can be resolved now... by you. Because of your legacy, you alone can cleanse the sins of our family and the fire nation. Born in you, along with all this strife, is the power to restore balance to the world.

(Cut to a bundle inside of a brick wall. Iroh removes a brick and reaches for the bundle. Cut to Iroh slowly unwrapping the bundle while he walks toward Zuko.)

Iroh: This is a royal artifact. It's supposed to be worn by the crown prince.

(Zuko reaches out and takes Roku's head dress from Iroh's hand. Zuko holds the artifact while the camera angle changes to a wide long shot of the back of Zuko, standing outside of Iroh's cell. Iroh stands quietly, looking at his nephew as a soft light glows from above his cell.

Cut to a wide shot of the hardened lava wave the gang had been sitting on from the previous act. Cut to a medium shot of Sokka, Katara and Toph all facing Aang as the camera pans down.)

Katara: (in disbelief) You mean, after all Roku and Sozin went through together... even after Roku showed him mercy, Sozin betrayed him like that?
Toph: It's like these people are born bad.
Aang: No, that's wrong. I don't think that was the point of what Roku showed me at all.
Sokka: (confused) Then what was the point?
Aang: Roku was just as much Fire Nation as Sozin was, right? If anything, their story proves anyone's capable of great good and great evil. Everyone, even the Fire Lord and the Fire Nation have to be treated like they're worth giving a chance. And I also think it was about friendships.
Toph: Do you really think friendships can last more than one lifetime?
Aang: (grabbing Toph's hand) I don't see why not.

(Katara enters the shot, and reaches out to hold Toph's hand as well.)

Sokka: (stroking his face) Well, scientifically speaking, there's no way to prove that..
Katara: (annoyed, she interrupts her brother) Oh, Sokka, just hold hands.

(Sokka stops talking, and without moving, he thrusts out his hand to hold Katara's. The camera angle changes, and now shows the gang holding hands looking out towards the ocean. The camera pans out, and fades.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence includes clips from "The Chase" and "The Headband".]



Act I

(The episode opens with a bird's eye view of Fire Fountain Village, looking down on the giant flaming statue of Ozai that dominates the town square. The camera cuts to a close-up of the statue's face and pans down to the ground, so that we see Toph running out from a side street towards the statue. She reaches the base of the statue and turns around, only to be engulfed in a net flung from the direction of the camera. She falls to the ground, hogtied. As Fire Nation "domestic forces" approach her, she looks up accusingly.)

Toph: How could you do this to me? You betrayed me!

(Cut to Katara, standing over Toph with an angry glare.)

Katara: You brought this on yourself. I had no choice.

(She folds her arms and turns her back on Toph. The helpless earthbender is dragged away.

Cut to an isolated area somewhere in the vicinity of Fire Fountain Village,
three days prior to the scene described above. Toph and Katara face each other, apparently about to engage in combat. Aang stands up between them, tying his headband around his eyes for a blindfold.)

Aang: Ok, I'm ready for some training!

(He assumes a fighting stance and stomps on the ground with one foot. Immediately the screen switches to Toph Vision and we see concentric circles radiating out from the impact of Aang's foot: Toph is instructing him in her ability to "see" via earthbending. She bends several columns of rock in his way and he dodges them with ease. Katara attacks with a water whip and Aang evades this as well, recoiling it back onto her and simultaneously hurling a boulder at Toph. Toph catches it on the end of her fist.)

Toph: Good job, twinkle-toes. Visualize - then attack!

(She propels the boulder back towards Aang, who corkscrews into the ground to avoid it. The boulder, obeying Newton's first law, continues on its trajectory and collides with Katara's chest, bowling her over.)

Katara: (angrily) Maybe you should take your own advice, Toph.
Toph: (obnoxiously) What's the matter? Can't handle some dirt, Madame Fussy Britches?

(Katara drenches Toph with a wave.)

Katara: Oh, sorry, did I splash you, mud slug?

(Furious, they career towards each other on ramps of rock and ice, respectively, collide, and fall to the ground with shrieks of rage.)

Aang: (still blindfolded) Are we taking a break?

(Cut to Sokka, with an evil grin on his face. He rushes towards Aang from
behind, yelling.)

Sokka: Yaaaaaah, sneak attack!

(Aang bends a column of rock in his path, then removes the blindfold.)

Aang: Sokka, sneak attacks don't work if you yell it out loud.

(Cut to Katara and Toph, wrestling in a pool of mud.)

Toph: Hungry for a mud pie?

(She kicks mud in Katara's face.)

Katara: I'll give you a mud pie.

(She mudbends Toph to the ground. Toph springs back up and earthbends Katara into the air. They are about to go at it again when they are interrupted by Aang.)

Aang: Uh, guys, I thought we were supposed to be training me.
Katara: (salvaging what dignity she can) Very well, pupil. I believe we've had enough training for today.

(She walks away.)

Toph: (derisively) While Katara cleans up, let's go have some fun!
Sokka and Aang: Yes! Yeah!

(Cut to Fire Fountain Village. Aang, Sokka, and Toph are strolling down the street. Messenger hawks are continually flying about, and Sokka takes notice of them.)

Sokka: Look at all those messenger hawks. You know, I've been thinking about getting one for myself. That way, I wouldn't have to talk to anyone... I could just send them messages!
Toph: (jokingly) I gotta say, I like the idea of not talking to you.
Aang: So, guys, what are we gonna get with our last silver piece?
Toph: We can get more money. Right there. (She points to a street below, where a con man is fleecing a crowd of Fire Nation citizens with a shell game.) This is where you seeing people are at a disadvantage. Everyone guesses wrong because the dealer moves the rock at the last minute. But I can feel it with my earthbending.

(By this time the kids have descended and joined the crowd around the table. The con man spots the innocent-looking "blind" girl and decides she is an easy mark.)

Dealer: You there. Want to play a friendly game?
Toph: How could I possibly play? I'm blind.
Dealer: You don't have to see to be lucky.

(She gropes her way to the table and lays down the last silver piece. The dealer practices his sleight of hand with the pea, sending it flying from one shell to another, but Toph can't be fooled. She guesses correctly and the dealer tosses money her way.)

Aang: Flamey-o, Toph!
Dealer: Wow, fancy guessing. You are amazing at this. Would you like to make the game a little more interesting?
Toph: More interesting? How?
Dealer: Well, let's say you toss in your friend's fine sword there. Then I'll put up twenty silver pieces against it, and that's more interesting.

(Toph grabs Sokka's sword and hands it over, to Sokka's distress.)

Toph: I'll do it for forty silver pieces.
Dealer: Forty silver pieces it is. (The shell shuffling begins again, faster and more furious. The dealer flicks the peas up into his sleeve, removing them from the game, but Toph earthbends one of them back just in time. She points at one of the shells. The dealer smugly lifts it.) Sorry, little lady, but... (to his shock, the pea is still there) ...huh?
Toph: I won!

(Cut to the gaang's campsite. Aang, Sokka, and Toph are returning, arms filled with provisions.)

Katara: (startled) Where did you guys get the money to buy all this stuff?
Aang: Toph got us money. She scammed one of those guys in town who moves the shells around all sneaky-like.
Sokka: She used earthbending to win the game. Classic!
Katara: Ah, so she cheated.
Toph: Hey, I only cheated because he was cheating. I cheated a cheater. What's wrong with that?
Katara: I'm just saying, this isn't something we should make a habit of doing.
Toph: Why? Because its fun, and you hate fun?
Katara: (indignantly) I don't hate fun. (She seizes Momo and drapes him on top of her head.) See? Fun.

(Momo slides off her head with an annoyed squawk.)

Aang: Katara, I'll personally make you an Avatar promise that we won't make a habit of doing these scams.

(He lifts his headband to reveal his arrow and solemnly bows to her.

"Avatar promises" apparently not being worth much, the scene immediately shifts back to Fire Fountain Village, where Toph uses her powers to rig a dice game, win a strongman competition, and extort a merchant after tricking him into thinking he had run her over with his carriage.

Cut back to the campsite, where Katara is remonstrating with the cash-flush flimflammers.)

Katara: Guys, I think these scams have gone far enough. If you keep doing them, something bad is gonna happen.
Toph: Could you for once stop being such a sourpuss and just lighten up?
Katara: Oh, I'm sorry. You think I should be more like you? Like some wild child?
Toph: Yeah, maybe. Maybe then, you'd see how great we have it. I mean, look at us. We're traveling around the world, making easy money, having fun, with no parents to tell us what to do.
Katara: Ah, I see. You're acting like this because of your parents.
Toph: (dismissively) Whatever.
Katara: They were controlling over you, so you ran away, and now you act like your parents don't exist. You act like you hate them, but you don't. You just feel guilty.
Toph: I do hate them!
Katara: I don't think so. I think you miss them. But you just don't want to deal with that, so instead, you act like this crazy person.
Toph: Look. I ran away to help Aang!
Katara: You know what? It doesn't matter. These scams put us all at risk, and we don't need that. We've already got some third-eyed freak after us.
Sokka: Speaking of that third-eyed freak... I think I've come up with a name for him. What do you think of..."Sparky-Sparky Boom Man"! (The gaang are unimpressed.) Just think about it.
Katara: We have enough money. You need to stop this!
Toph: I'll stop when I want to stop, and not when you tell me!

(She walks away.)

Sokka: Speaking of money, I'm off to spend some. See you guys later (Cut to Fire FountainVillage, where Sokka hasjust fulfilled his dream and bought himself a messenger hawk.) Hawky, welcome to Team Avatar. My name's Sokka, and I'm your new owner. And as such, I should warn you that there's already a lemur in our group, so I don't want to see any fighting. (He pokes the hawk affectionately and coos baby-talk at it.) Good wittle messenger Hawky. Who's got pwetty feathers? (He walks by a wanted poster of Toph, and does a double-take.) You're right, Hawky. This is bad.



Act II

(The scene opens on the campsite. Sokka, with Hawky perched on his shoulder, walks towards Toph as she sits counting money.)

Sokka: Toph, when I was in town, I found something that you're not gonna like.

(He unfurls the wanted poster.)

Toph: Well, it sounds like a sheet of paper, but I guess you're referring to what's on the sheet of paper.
Sokka: It's a wanted poster. Of you. They've nicknamed you "The Runaway."
Toph: (enthused) A wanted poster. That's so great. "The Runaway". I love my new nickname. Is there a picture of me? Does it look good?

(He checks her against her likeness.)

Sokka: Well, yeah, actually, it does look pretty good. But Toph, you're missing the point. Maybe Katara was right. These scams are drawing too much attention to us.
Toph: Don't be such a worrywart like your sister. Think of it this way. Now you have plenty of money to help with the invasion plan!

(She dangles a sack of money before him.)

Sokka: Well, that is true. I had this idea of making armor for Appa.
Toph: Here's a little extra so you can get yourself a nice map of the Fire Nation. You know what? Make it an atlas.

(She hands him the entire bag.)

Sokka: I do like expensive atlases.
Toph: Of course you do. And that's why this wanted poster is going to stay our little secret.

(She snatches it from him, hides it beneath her vest and walks away as Aang and Katara walk up.)

Katara: Sokka, tell me you didn't buy a bird.
Sokka: Not just a bird. A messenger bird! Now we can send messages all over the world, even to Gran-Gran.
Aang: Wow, how does it work?
Sokka: Hm, uh, I never actually thought about that. Hawky: Gran-Gran, South Pole. (He points helpfully. Hawky shakes his head in confusion.) I think he gets it. (Momo appears over Aang's shoulder and dashes at his new rival. They wheel furiously about Sokka's head as he tries to calm them.) Hawky, make nice! Bad Hawky!

(Later in the day. Sokka and Toph are returning from further hijinks in town, arms loaded with money.)

Katara: Well, look who decided to join us. Where have you two been? Off scamming again?
Toph: Yes, we were.
Katara: And I suppose you don't think what you're doing is dangerous at all?
Toph: No, I don't.
Katara: Really?
Toph: Yes, really.
Katara: Well then, what's this?

(She flourishes the wanted poster before Toph.)

Toph: (exasperated) I don't know! I mean, seriously, what's with you people I'm blind!
Katara: It's a wanted poster of you. "The Runaway". Is that what you're called now? Are you proud of this?
Toph: Where did you get that?!
Katara: It doesn't matter where I got it. The fact is...
Toph: You went through my stuff! You had no right.
Katara: Your stuff was messy, and I was just straightening up and I happened to stumble across it.
Toph: That's a lie! You're lying, Katara.
Katara: Fine! It's a lie. But you've been so out of control lately, I knew something was up. I knew you were hiding something, and you were. (Toph knocks the poster from Katara's hand and walks away.) Don't you walk away from me while I'm talking to you!
Toph: Oh, really, Mom? Or what are you going to do? Send me to my room?
Katara: I wish I could.
Toph: Well, you can't. Because you're not my mom, and you're not their mom.

(She points to Aang and Sokka.)

Katara: I never said I was!
Toph: No, but you certainly act like it. You think it's your job to boss everyone around, but it's not. You're just a regular kid like the rest of us, so stop acting like you can tell me what to do. I can do whatever I want!
Katara: (chagrined) I don't act that way. (in a shrill and anxious voice) Sokka, do I act motherly?

(Sokka, alarmed, decides discretion is the better part of valor.)

Sokka: Hey - I'm staying out of this one.
Katara: What do you think, Aang? Do I act like a mom?
Aang: (digging nervously at his eye) Well, I...
Katara: Stop rubbing your eye and speak clearly when you talk!
Aang: (chastened) Yes, ma'am.
Toph: I can't be around you right now!
Katara: Well, I can't be around you!

(They storm off. Hawky squawks plaintively.)

Sokka: I know, Hawky. Why can't they just get along?

(Still later in the day. Aang and Sokka, sitting together, observe Katara and Toph sitting resentfully at opposite ends of the camp.)

Sokka: Hey, Aang, you want to test out my messenger hawk with me? I've got an idea.
Aang: Sure.
Sokka: I'm gonna send a note to Katara and say it's from Toph, who wants to apologize. Then everyone will be friends again.
Aang: I gotta say, Sokka, you continue to impress me with your ideas.
Sokka: Eh, it's a gift. (He takes pen and paper and composes a missive.) Dear Katara. Sorry for everything. Your friend, Toph.

(He slides the note into Hawky's dispatch tube and the bird sails over to Katara, who reads the message and stands up facing the boys.)

Katara: I know this is from you, Sokka. Toph can't write. Ugh, you're all driving me crazy!

(She walks away.)

Aang: I can't believe we forgot Toph can't write.
Sokka: Yep, we're idiots.
Aang: I guess plan B is, we send a note to Toph pretending it's from Katara.
Sokka: I think we're gonna run into a similar problem. Sorry, Hawky. Looks like I'm gonna have to do this without your help. (He walks over to Toph.) Come on, we need to talk.

(They repair to an overhanging cliff, unaware that Katara is bathing in the water below. Their entire conversation is audible to her.)

Toph: So let me guess. You brought me out here to tell me your sister's not as annoying as I make her out to be.
Sokka: Nah, she's pretty much a pain. (Katara scowls.) She's always got to be right about everything, and she gets all bossy, and involved, and in your business.
Toph: Yeah, I don't know how you can deal with it.
Sokka: Actually, in a way, I rely on it.
Toph: I don't understand.
Sokka: When our mom died, that was the hardest time in my life. Our family was a mess, but Katara, she had so much strength. She stepped up and took on so much responsibility. She helped fill the void that was left by our mom.
Toph: I guess I never thought about that.
Sokka: I'm gonna tell you something crazy. I never told anyone this before, but honestly, I'm not sure I can remember what my mother looked like. It really seems like, my whole life, Katara's been the one looking out for me. She's always been the one that's there, and now, when I try to remember my mom, Katara's is the only face I can picture.

(Katara is overcome with emotion.)

Toph: The truth is, sometimes Katara does act motherly, but that's not always a bad thing. She's compassionate and kind, and she actually cares about me. You know, the real me. That's more than my own mom. (Katara lowers her head, in sadness or perhaps shame.) Don't ever tell her I said any of this.

(She punches Sokka in the shoulder.)

Sokka: Hey, my lips are sealed.

(As the sun sets, the kids reunite at the camp.)

Katara: Hi, Toph. Um, I want to...
Toph: Katara, stop. You don't need to apologize. I was the one being stupid. These scams are out of control, and I'm done with them.
Katara: (slyly) Actually, I wasn't going to apologize. I was gonna say... I want to pull a scam with you!

(Aang and Sokka gape in astonishment.)

Toph: What? You want to pull a scam?
Katara: Not just any scam...the ultimate scam! (The boys collapse, stupefied.) What do you say, Toph? Just me and you... one last go. You in?
Toph: You know I'm in! Now what's this idea of yours?

(The two conspirators walk off together. The boys lie supine on the ground, foaming at the mouth.)



Act III

(The campsite at sunset. Toph and Katara plot.)

Katara: The plan is simple. This wanted poster says you're worth a lot of money. (Cut to Fire Fountain Village, presumably the next day. The scene from the beginning of the episode replays, with Katara's plan as a voice-over.) Ten times more than you've made in all your scams. So I'm gonna turn you in and collect the reward. Then you metalbend yourself out of jail, and we're on our way.

(By this time, Toph is captured and falls to the ground.)

Toph: How could you do this to me? You betrayed me.
Katara: You brought this on yourself. I had no choice.

(The mayor walks up to Katara as Toph is dragged away.)

Mayor: You did the right thing by turning in "The Runaway".
Katara: (sanctimoniously) The right thing is its own reward.
Mayor: Well, I'm happy to hear you say that.
Katara: (disconcerted) But... I still want the actual reward.
Mayor: Of course. Right this way.

(Cut to the town jail. Toph is dragged past a metal cell and flung into a wooden one. She gropes around and is dismayed to find her "sight" inoperative.)

Toph: (alarmed) Hey, what kind of cell is this?
Female Fire Nation Officer: (through the bars) A wooden one.

(Cut to the mayor's office. The mayor is opening a moneybox for Katara when the door creaks open. The mayor points to Katara and speaks to a person in the doorway.)

Mayor: That's her. That's the girl you were looking for.

(Katara turns around to see the hulking figure of Combustion Man looming over her.

Cut back to the campsite, where Aang is pacing back and forth.)

Aang: Do you think this scam of theirs should be taking this long?
Sokka: I was just wondering the same thing. We'd better check it out. (Leaving, he admonishes Hawky and Momo.) You two behave. Appa's in charge.

(The two creatures begin to squabble anyway, but a reproving roar from Appa puts a quick stop to that.

Cut back to the jail, where Katara has joined Toph in her cell.)

Toph: Wait. It's a trap!
Katara: Really? No kidding. Is that why we're sitting in a wooden cage right now? Gee, how'd you figure out it was a trap?
Toph: Not for us, Katara. We're the bait. He wants Aang.
Katara: I can't believe I was so stupid. See, this is exactly why I'm against these scams. I knew this would happen.
Toph: But...this was your idea.
Katara: I know. I wanted to show you that I'm not so motherly. I wanted to show you that I can have fun too.
Toph: Katara, you are fun. If nothing else, you're at least fun to argue with.
Katara: I know your relationship with your parents is complicated, and I shouldn't have said what I said.
Toph: It's ok. I was really mad when you said that because; well, because maybe it's true. I try not to think about it, but when I left, I probably really hurt them.

(She sobs. Katara comforts her with a hug.

Cut to the strangely deserted streets of Fire Fountain Village, where Aang and Sokka are searching for the girls.)

Sokka: Where do you think they might be?
Aang: Where do you think anyone is? (Combustion Man appears on a rooftop, just above the boys. As he draws in his breath preparatory to firebending at them, Aang hears the intake of breath and, looking upward, spots him.) Sokka, watch out! (Combustion Man lets loose a blast; the boys barely manage to dodge it.) It's "Sparky-Sparky Boom Man"!
Sokka: You know, I'm starting to think that name doesn't quite fit.

(Combustion Man leaps to the ground and fires another shot at them.

Cut back to the jail cell, where Katara and Toph can hear the sounds of the fight.)

Katara: What are we gonna do?
Toph: I don't know! I wish we had some earth or water. We need bendables!
Katara: What about your meteor bracelet? You could make a saw.
Toph: I left it back at camp. I was worried they would take it. (Katara wipes sweat from her forehead... and has an idea. She stands up and begins running in place. Toph is understandably puzzled.) Um, Katara...are you ok?
Katara: Just fine.
Toph: Well, what are you doing?
Katara: I'm making my own water!

(She dashes the sweat now pouring from her face against the cell bars, cutting deep swipes in them.)

Toph: Katara, you're a genius! A sweaty, stinky genius!

(Katara sticks her hands beneath her armpits and flings the sweat from them towards the bars.

Cut to the town square, where Aang and Sokka are frantically eluding Combustion Man's assaults.)

Sokka: This guy is too good. He shoots fire from his brain!
Aang: We should split up. He can't chase us both.

(They split. As Aang runs along a roof, Combustion Man spots him and fires. The blast sends Aang careering into the chest of the statue of Ozai, whence he falls to the ground, prostrate. Combustion Man walks up to him and is about to deliver the coup de grace, when a bolt of ice suddenly encases his head. He stumbles away to reveal Katara and the gaang behind him.)

Katara: Aang, get up!
Toph: Let's get out of here.

(The gaang flees, but not before Combustion Man shatters his ice muzzle. As he prepares to fire at them, Toph bends a rock at him. He destroys it with a fire blast, but a piece of the rubble flies into his forehead and strikes his tattoo, knocking him to the ground and apparently causing him extreme pain. He gets up and tries to resume his attack, but his power has somehow been turned against him; as he tries to focus his "laser beam", the air around him ignites and explodes.

Cut to the kids, running out of the village.)

Sokka: Hey, I got it. The perfect name for that guy! "Combustion Man"!
Toph: Good job, Sokka. Now let's get out of here before "Combustion Man" catches us!
Sokka: See? It fits so well.

(Cut to the kids on Appa, descending towards a new campsite. It is nighttime. Sokka yawns and stretches as they land.)

Sokka: Well, I'm exhausted. Hawky, how about you, buddy? (affectionately) Yeah, you're such a lazy little bird.
Toph: Katara, I need your help.
Katara: What is it, Toph?
Toph: I need you to write some things down for me. I want to send a letter to my parents.
Katara: I'll be happy to help.

(The letter written, Toph slips it into Hawky's dispatch tube and the bird soars into the night air. It takes only a few seconds, however, for Sokka to notice that someone is missing.)

Sokka: Hey, where'd Hawky go?



[End Credits]
[Introduction sequence includes clips from "The Boy in the Iceberg", "The Siege of the North, Part 1", and "The Runaway".]



Act I

(The episode opens with a shot of the waxing moon hovering in the night sky, almost full. Cut to a shot of a field of red flowers. A single, large mountain is seen in the background underneath the bright moon. Cut to a shot of Appa fast asleep inside a cave. The camera pans right to Aang and his friends gathered around a campfire underneath a gnarled and twisted tree. Cut to a close up of Sokka.)

Sokka: Suddenly, they heard something down the hall, in the dark. Oooh... It came into the torchlight. And they knew the blade of Wing - Fun was haunted! Aah-ah...

(Sokka dramatically pulls his sword out and wails in an attempt to be scary. Aang, Katara, and Toph are unimpressed.)

Aang: I think I liked "the man with a sword for a hand" better.
Toph: Water Tribe slumber parties must stink.
Katara: No, wait, I've got one, and this is a true Southern Water Tribe story.
Sokka: Is this one of those "a friend of my cousin knew some guy that this happened to" stories?
Katara: No, it happened to Mom. (everyone focuses their attention on her) One winter, when Mom was a girl, a snowstorm buried the whole village for weeks. A month later, Mom realized she hadn't seen her friend Nini since the storm. So mom and some others went to check on Nini's family. When they got there, no one was home, just a fire flickering in the fireplace. While the men went out to search, Mom stayed in the house. When she was alone, she heard a voice, (little girl's voice) "It's so cold and I can't get warm." Mom turned and saw Nini standing by the fire. She was blue, like she was frozen. Mom ran outside for help, but... when every one came back, Nini was gone.

(Aang wraps Momo's ears around his head nervously. The camera pans left to Sokka, who is hiding behind a tree trunk and peering over.)

Sokka: Where'd she go?
Katara: No one knows. Nini's house stands empty to this day. But sometimes, people see smoke coming up from the chimney, like little Nini is still trying to get warm.

(The camera zooms out from a shot of the gang huddled around the fire, looking through the twisted tree limbs. Ominous music is heard in the background. Cut to a close up of Toph. She gasps and places a hand to the ground.)

Toph: Wait. Guys, did you hear that? I hear people under the mountain, and they're screaming.

(Aang, Katara, Momo, and Sokka all hug each other, trembling with fear. Sokka soon regains his composure.)

Sokka: Pft, nice try.

(Cut back to the shot looking through the tree limbs.)

Toph: No, I'm serious, I hear something.
Katara: You're probably just jumpy from the ghost stories.
Toph: It just stopped.
Aang: All right, now I'm getting scared.
Old Woman: Hello, children. (Aang, Katara, Sokka, and Momo all scream and run off, revealing her. They all gather around and hug Toph. She walks into the fire's light) Sorry to frighten you, my name is Hama. You children shouldn't be out in the forest by yourselves at night. I have an inn nearby, why don't you come back there for some spiced tea and warm beds?

(The camera pans across the faces of the group, stopping at Sokka.)

Sokka: Yes, please.

(Hama smiles and walks away. The scene shifts to a shot of several houses situated on a steep slope. The camera tilts up to an old in at the top of the slope. Cut to a close up of a small cup being filled with hot water. Cut to a panning right shot of everyone gathered around a square table under a single lit lamp in the dining room. They all have cups of tea, and Hama is pouring Katara's.)

Katara: Thanks for letting us stay here tonight. You have a lovely inn.
Hama: Aren't you sweet? You know, you should be careful. People have been disappearing in those woods you were camping in.
Sokka: What do you mean, disappearing?
Hama: (ominously) When the moon turns full, people walk in, and they don't come out. (cheerfully) Who wants more tea? (she frowns. The camera pans across the table, showing the fearful expression the kids all have) Don't worry; you'll all be completely safe here. Why don't I show you to your rooms, and you can get a good night's rest?

(The scene shifts to Sokka's room and zooms in on him lying in his bed. Momo is asleep on the floor. The creaking of old trees is heard outside. Cut to a close up of Sokka rolling over, unable to fall asleep. He shuts his eyes, but opens them in terror when he hears a high pitched squeak from inside. Sokka grabs his sword and quickly sits up, drawing it. Momo chirps and hides under his covers. He looks around, but nothing is there, so he sheathes his sword.)

Sokka: I know Momo, this place is creepy. I don't know if I'm gonna be able to fall asleep.

(Sokka pulls the covers up to his eyes and looks left and right nervously. The screen slides upward like a roll of film and transitions to a shot of Sokka fast asleep, snoring and drooling. Cut to the wide shot of the room and pan right. The scene fades to morning and Sokka is now lying over the side of his bed on the floor. Cut to an upside down close up of Sokka snoring. Someone walks up to him, casting their shadow over his face and waking him.)

Hama: Wakey-wakey. (Sokka wakes up and rubs his eyes. Cut to Sokka's perspective as she leans over him and smiles) Time to go shopping.

(Katara walks into Sokka's view, smiling happily. Cut back to the close up of Sokka. The camera turns counter-clockwise and fades to a similar close up of Sokka dressed and carrying grocery bags with his sword in the town market. The camera quickly zooms out to a close up of Hama handing three coins to a merchant. Cut to a shot of Hama and Katara walking away as the old merchant smiles and waves goodbye. Cut to a close up of Katara.)

Katara: That Mr. Yao seems to have a thing for you. Maybe we should go back and see if he'll give us some free komodo sausages.
Hama: You would have me use my feminine charms to take advantage of that poor man? I think you and I are going to get along swimmingly.

(Katara and Hama walk off camera and reveal a townsman talking to a different merchant.)

Townsman: You won't have any ash bananas till next week?
Merchant: Well, I have to send the boy to Hing-Wa Island to get them, and it's a two-day trip.
Townsman: Oh, right, tomorrow's the full moon.
Merchant: Exactly, I can't lose another delivery boy in the woods.

(Sokka, Aang, and Toph walk past the townsman and merchant, overhearing their conversation.

Sokka: People disappearing in the woods, weird stuff during full moons... this just reeks of spirit world shenanigans.
Aang: I bet if we take a little walk around town, we'll find out what these people did to the environment to make the spirits mad.
Sokka: And then you can sew up this little mystery, lickety-split, Avatar-style.
Aang: Helping people...that's what I do.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the entire group. Hama stops and turns to Katara.)

Hama: Why don't you all take those things back to the inn? I just have to run a couple more errands. I'll be back in a little while.
Sokka: This is a mysterious little town you have here (looks right into Hama's face).

(Cut to an extreme close up of Hama.)

Hama: (cryptically and smiling) Mysterious town for mysterious children.

(Hama walks away. The camera zooms in on Sokka, who has an odd, confused expression. Cut to a shot of Hama's inn, then to the kitchen inside. Sokka places the wooden bucket of groceries on the table and the camera tilts up to him.)

Sokka: That Hama seems a little strange. Like she knows something, or she's hiding something.
Katara: That's ridiculous. She's a nice woman who took us in and gave us a place to stay. She kind of reminds me of Gran-Gran.
Sokka: But what did she mean by that comment, "mysterious children"?
Katara: (sarcastically) Gee, I don't know. Maybe because she found four strange kids, camping in the woods at night? Isn't that a little mysterious?
Sokka: I'm gonna take a look around.

(Sokka walks out of the kitchen and up a nearby flight of stairs. Katara, Aang, and Toph follow after.)

Katara: Sokka! Sokka, what are you doing? You can't just snoop around someone's house.
Sokka: It'll be fine.

(Sokka proceeds to open one of the doors upstairs and glances inside the dark room. It is only a simple bedroom and he closes the door back.)

Aang:She could be home any minute.
Katara: (nervous) Sokka, you're gonna get us all in trouble, and this is just plain rude.

(Sokka finds a cabinet in the wall and grabs the door handles, trying to open it, but they are stuck.)

Sokka: I'm not finished yet. [grunts] Come on...

(Sokka yanks the doors open. Cut to a close up of several marionettes falling forward, being held in place by their strings. They all yelp in surprise. Sokka jumps back and draws his sword at the puppets in fright, his back against the wall and sliding to the floor.)

Aang: Ok, that's pretty creepy.
Katara: (closes the doors) So... she's got a hobby. There's nothing weird about that. Sokka, you've looked enough. Hama will be back soon.

(Sokka makes his way up into the dark attic and tries to open a nearby door, but it is locked. The other three walk up the stairs and join him.)

Sokka: Just an ordinary, puppet-loving innkeeper, huh? Then why does she have a locked door up here?
Katara: (angry) Probably to keep people like you from snooping through her stuff.
Sokka: We'll see. (peers in through the keyhole. Cut to his perspective. The camera zooms in on a small chest, sitting in the light shining through the attic window) It's empty except for a little chest.
Toph: (excitedly) Maybe it's treasure.

(Sokka smiles gleefully at the thought of treasure. Aang and Katara frown at Toph. Sokka draws his sword and begins to pick the door's lock with its tip.)

Katara: Sokka, what are you doing? You're breaking into a private room.
Sokka: I have to see what's in there.

(There is a click and the door opens. Cut to a close up of the chest. The group can be seen walking up to it from behind.)

Aang: We shouldn't be doing this.

(Sokka reaches down and picks up the chest. He tries to open it, but the chest is locked.)

Sokka: Maybe there's a key here somewhere.
Toph: Oh, hand it over.

(Sokka hands Toph the chest. She takes the armband made of space earth from her arm and bends it into the shape of a key. Toph pushes the key inside the chest's lock and begins turning it.)

Sokka: Come on, come on!
Toph: This isn't as easy it looks.

(Katara looks over Toph's shoulders, blinking nervously. The sound of a bell is added to her blinks for humorous effect.)

Aang: (nervous) Guys, I don't know about this.
Katara: This is crazy, I'm leaving.
Sokka: Suit yourself. Do it, Toph.

(Katara begins to walk away. Cut to a close up of the chest as a click is heard. Cut to a shot of Toph as she gives a thumb up to Sokka and Aang. Both gather around the chest and even Katara runs back to try and look inside. They all inadvertently push Toph to the side. Their cheeks are pressed together comically. The lid of the chest is slowly lifted until a voice is heard behind them)

Hama: I'll tell you what's in the box.

(Aang, Sokka, and Katara yell with fear and alarm. The four quickly turn around and Sokka hides the chest behind his back. Cut to a tilting up shot of Hama standing in the attic doorway as she walks forward. Cut to a shot of the kids. Sokka, Katara, and Aang look down with guilt as Sokka hands the chest to Hama.

Cut to a shot from inside the chest as Hama opens it and reaches inside. Cut to a close up of Sokka's eyes, wide with fear and anticipation. Hama begins to lift the object from the chest. Cut to a shot of the four kids. They look up in fear as Hama lifts the object in front of the camera. The tension is lifted when the object is revealed to be nothing more than a simple blue comb made from whale bone. Hama smiles at them cheerfully.)

Sokka: (disbelief) An old comb?
Hama: It's my greatest treasure. It's the last thing I owned from growing up in the Southern Water Tribe.

(The camera zooms in on Sokka and Katara as a wave of shock goes through them. Fade to black, then commercial.)



Act II

(The episode returns to a shot of the kids staring at Hama in shock.)

Katara: You're from the Southern Water Tribe?
Hama: Just like you.
Katara: How did you know?
Hama: I heard you talking around your campfire.
Sokka: But why didn't you tell us?
Hama: I wanted to surprise you. I bought all this food today so I could fix you a big, Water Tribe dinner. Of course, I can't get all the ingredients I need here, but ocean kumquats are a lot like sea prunes, if you stew them long enough.
Aang: (grimaces in utter disgust) Great.
Katara: I knew I felt a bond with you right away.
Sokka: And I knew you were keeping a secret, so I guess we're both right. (Katara punches him in the arm) But I'm sorry we were sneaking around.
Hama: Apology accepted. Now let's get cooking.

(The scene cuts to the outside of the inn. It is night, and lights can be seen in the windows. The camera pans left as Aang runs outside to a small barn. Cut to the inside of the barn where Appa and Momo are staying. Aang opens the door and tosses a cabbage into Appa's mouth. Momo jumps to the ground and chirps furiously as Appa. Appa spits the cabbage out. Momo grabs the cabbage and carries it off screen.

Cut to a close up of Hama placing a bowl of soup on the table inside the inn. Cut to a panning right shot of everyone seated at the dinner table, empty bowls placed in front of them. Cut to a shot of Aang leaning over to Toph.)

Aang: I'd steer clear of the "sea prunes".
Toph: I thought they were ocean kumquats.
Aang: Close enough.
Hama: Who wants five-flavor soup?

(Aang, Katara, and Sokka raise their hands. Hama places her hand over the bowl of soup and bends the liquid out of it. With a flick of her fingers, Hama bends the soup into everyone's bowls, much to their amazement.)

Katara: You're a Waterbender! I've never met another Waterbender from our tribe.
Hama: (sadly) That's because the Fire Nation wiped them all out. I was the last one.
Sokka: So how did you end up out here?
Hama: I was stolen from my home. (fade to a flashback of a young Hama in the Southern Water Tribe) It was over 60 years ago when the raids started.

(Hama walks over to a young Kana and they both giggle. Hama looks up as black snow begins to fall from the sky. Cut to Hama and Kana running up the steps to the top of the wall surrounding the village. The camera tilts up to reveal Fire Nation ships floating out in the water, and large fire balls flying towards the camera. Cut to an overhead shot of the village being bombarded. Cut to a close up of several firebenders marching away from the ships, ash and soot falling all around them.

Cut to a shot of a firebender throwing fireballs in every direction. Villagers run away in fright, and another firebender runs onscreen behind him. A waterbender emerges from underneath the snow behind the firebender, encasing the firebender in the background in a pillar of ice and knocking the one in the foreground away with a trail of ice from the ground. A large net is thrown over the waterbender and he is dragged off screen.

Cut to a shot of Hama and several other waterbenders as they fight of the firebenders. To of the waterbenders behind her are captured by the nets. A net is thrown over Hama, but she cuts it in half with a blade of water.)

Hama: (voice over) They came again and again, each time, rounding up more of our Waterbenders, and taking them captive.

(Young Hama watches as the other waterbenders are dragged off towards the ships. Fade to a close up of Hama panting. The camera zooms out to a shot of her and several other waterbenders raising their arms upward. Cut to a far shot of a Fire Nation ship being pushed up and trapped by the ice underneath that Hama and the other waterbenders are bending. It is the same ship that Aang
and Katara explored in "The Boy in the Iceberg.")

Hama>: (voice over) We did our best to hold them off, but our numbers dwindled as the raids continued.

(The waterbenders behind Hama fade and disappear until only Hama is left. Cut to a close up of Hama. The camera rotates around her and zooms out to show firebenders surrounding her. She lowers her hands in defeat. )

Hama: (voice over) Finally, I too was captured.

(Cut to an overhead shot of Hama surrounded by three large rings of firebenders. A Fire Nation flag flutters in the foreground. Cut to a shot of Hama being led up the steps of a Fire Nation ship, her hands shackled.)

Hama: (voice over) I was led away in chains. The last Waterbender of the Southern Water Tribe.

(Cut to a shot of Hama standing at the top of the steps, flanked by the firebenders. The camera zooms out before cutting to a shot of young Kana, tears in her eyes, and a few other villagers looking back. Cut to a close up of a tears eyed Hama. A shadow passes over her. Cut to Hama's perspective as the stairs are pulled up. With a loud thud, the flash back ends and the scene shifts back to Hama in the present. The camera zooms out as Katara walks to Hama and puts her hands on Hama's shoulders consolingly.)

Hama: They put us in terrible prisons here in the Fire Nation. I was the only one who managed to escape.
Sokka: How did you get away? And why did you stay in the Fire Nation?
Hama: I'm sorry. It's too painful to talk about anymore.
Katara: We completely understand. We lost our mother in a raid.
Hama: (patting Katara's hand) Oh, you poor things.

(Aang and Sokka lower their heads solemnly)

Katara: I can't tell you what it means to meet you. It's an honor, you're a hero.
Hama: I never thought I'd meet another Southern Waterbender. I'd like to teach you what I know, so you can carry on the Southern Tradition when I'm gone.
Katara: (excitedly) Yes, yes of course! To learn about my heritage, it would mean everything to me.

(Cut to a close up of Hama and zoom in as she smiles. Cut to a shot of the town on the next day.)

Hama: (off screen) Growing up at the South Pole, Waterbenders are totally at home surrounded by snow and ice and seas. (the camera tilts down to Hama and Katara walking over a rocky hillside outside the village) But, as you probably noticed on your travels, that isn't the case wherever you go.
Katara: I know, when we were stranded in the desert, I felt like there was almost nothing I could do.
Hama: That's why you have to learn to control water wherever it exists.
Katara: I've even used my own sweat for waterbending.
Hama: That's very resourceful, Katara. You're thinking like a true master. But did you know you can even pull water out of thin air? (throws her hand out and creates a circle over her head, collecting the moisture in the
air) You've got to keep an open mind, Katara. (cut to a close up of the water forming around her fingers and turning into icicles) There's water in places you never think about.

(Hama swings her hand around behind her and throws the icicles. They lodge themselves into the trunk of a nearby tree with ease. Cut to a close up of Hama. The camera pans to the right slightly and zooms in on Katara standing behind her, looking on happily. Cut to a panning right shot of a river in the Fire Nation countryside from the top of a mountain. Aang comes into view.)

Aang: This has gotta be the nicest, natural setting in the Fire Nation. I don't see anything that would make a spirit mad around here.
Toph: Maybe the moon spirit just turned mean.

(Sokka takes a big whiff of some yellow flowers before turning to Toph.)

Sokka: (furious) The moon spirit is a gentle, loving lady. She rules the sky with compassion and... lunar goodness.

(A traveler walks down the nearby trail and Aang turns to him.)

Aang: Excuse me, sir. Can you tell us anything about the spirit that's been stealing people?
Traveling Townsman: Only one man ever saw it and lived, and that's Old Man Ding.
Toph: Where does Old Man Ding live?

(The scene shifts to Katara and Hama walking through the field of red flowers dotted with large rocks. The mountain can be seen in the distance.)

Katara: Wow, these flowers are beautiful.
Hama: They're called Fire Lilies. They only bloom a few weeks a year, but they're one of my favorite things about living here. And like all plants, and all living things, they're filled with water.
Katara: I met a Waterbender who lived in a swamp, and could control the vines by bending the water inside.
Hama: You can take it even further.

(Hama waves her hands in a large circle, being the water right out of the fire lilies surrounding her, making them dry, black and shriveled. Hama completes the circle and chops her hand downward at tall rock. The water hits the rock and passes through, cleanly slicing off four pieces.)

Katara: That was incredible. (stares down at the flowers sadly) It's a shame about the lilies, though.
Hama: They're just flowers. When you're a Waterbender in a strange land, you do what you must to survive. Tonight, I'll teach you the ultimate technique of Waterbending. It can only be done during the full moon, when your bending is at its peak.
Katara: But isn't that dangerous? I thought people have been disappearing around here during the full moon.
Hama: Oh, Katara. Two master Waterbenders beneath a full moon? I don't think we have anything to worry about.

(Katara and Hama begin walking away towards the forest. The camera tilts up and fades to an overhead shot of Aang, Sokka, and Toph walking through town at night. The camera tilts up to an old man at work on one of the small houses. Cut to a close up of the old man steadying his hammer as he holds a nail against a board.)

Aang: (off screen) Old Man Ding?

(The camera zooms out slightly. Old Man Ding glances back behind him just as he brings his hammer down on his thumb, causing him an immense amount of pain and to drop his hammer.)

Old Man Ding: Eeh, yeow! Aw, dang blame it! What? Can't you see I'm busy Got a full moon rising. And why does everyone call me that? I'm not that old. (crouches down to lift up a board, but is too weak) Aww... well, I'm young at heart. (Aang reaches down and helps him lift the board up to the window) Not ready to get snapped up by some moon monster, yet, at least.
Sokka: (takes the hammer and nail and proceeds to nail the board down) We wanted to ask you about that.
Aang: Did you get a good look at the spirit that took you?
Old Man Ding: Didn't see no spirit. Just felt something come over me, like I was possessed. Forced me to start walking toward the mountain. (cut to a close up of Ding's finger pointing at the mountain) I tried to fight it, but I couldn't control my own limbs. (walks around a bit like he is possessed) It just about had me into a cave up there. And I looked up at the moon, for what I thought would be my last glimpse of light. But then, the sun started to rise. And I got control of myself again! I just high-tailed it away from that mountain as quick as I could!
Sokka: Why would a spirit want to take people to a mountain?
Toph: Oh, no! (she startles Aang and Sokka) I did hear people screaming under the mountain. The missing villagers must still be there.

(The camera zooms out from a shot of them all staring up at the mountain. Cut to commercial.)



Act III

(The show returns to a shot of Toph's feet running across the ground. She, Sokka, and Aang sprint through the woods until she stops and places a hand on the ground.)

Toph: I can hear them, they're this way.

(Toph, Aang, and Sokka all run towards the mountain. Cut to a close up of the full moon shining brightly in the sky. Cut to a far, overhead shot of Katara and Hama in the woods.)

Hama: Can you feel the power the full moon brings? (inhales deeply) For generations, it has blessed Waterbenders with its glow, allowing us to do incredible things. (Cut to a close up of her arm as she flexes her hand and as her veins begin to pop out. Cut to a shot of her staring at the moon, arms outstretched, then to an extreme close up of her face) I've never felt more alive.

(The scene cuts back to Toph, Aang, and Sokka making their way to the foot of the mountain. Cut to a shot from the inside of a cave as the three come to its mouth.)

Toph: This is the place.
Sokka: I can't see anything down there.
Toph: (takes Sokka's hand) That's why you have me, let's go.

(They all jump into the darkness of the cave. The camera zooms in, and the scene fades to darkness before returning to a shot of the inside of the cave. The camera pans right to a wall and metal doorway that are lit by two torches. Toph, Aang, and Sokka run up to it. Toph stops at the door, stomps her foot down behind her for support, and punches the door with both fists, knocking it off its hinges. They make their way further into the cave, Sokka and Aang lighting the way with the torches. Cut to their point of view as they enter a new chamber. They stop, and Sokka and Aang stare with shock as the torch light reveals dozens of men and women chained to the walls of the cave.)

1st Male Prisoner: We're saved.

(The three enter the chamber. Toph takes her armband off and begins unlocking one person's shackles.)

Aang: I didn't know that spirits made prisons like this, who brought you here?
Female Prisoner: It was no spirit.
2nd Male Prisoner: It was a witch.
Sokka: A witch, what do you mean?
Male Prisoner: She seems like a normal old woman, but she controls people like some dark puppetmaster.
Sokka: (angry) Hama!
1st Male Prisoner: Yes, the innkeeper.
Sokka: I knew there was something creepy about her.
Aang: We have to stop Hama!
Toph: I'll get these people out of here, you go.

(Sokka gives one of the freed prisoners his torch before running with Aang. Cut to a shot of a cat-owl sitting on a tree branch, directly in front of the moon, hooting and swishing its tail before flying away. Cut to a panning right shot of Hama and Katara, their backs to the camera.)

Hama: What I'm about to show you, I discovered in that wretched, Fire Nation prison. (fade to a flashback of a close up of young Hama staring through the bars of a cell and looking down sadly) The guards were always careful to keep any water away from us. They piped in dry air, and had us suspended away from the ground.

(Cut to a panning right shot of the prison. The cells hang from chains, and there are pipes lining the walls. The guards stand on walkways between the cells.)

Hama: (voiceover) Before giving us any water, they would bind our hands and feet so we couldn't bend. Any sign of trouble was met with cruel retribution.

(Cut to a shot of a guard holding a cup attached to a long pole up to Hama mouth. Her hands are chained and pulled up above her as she drinks the water. The scene flashes white and returns to the present to a shot of the full moon.)

Hama: And yet, each month, I felt the full moon enriching me with its energy. There had to be something I could do to escape. (fade back to young Hama in her cell, staring at the moon shining through the grate in the prison ceiling) Then I realized that where there is life, there is water. The rats that scurried across the floor of my cage, were nothing more than skins filled with liquid. (an elephant rat crawls over the chains and into her cell. She flexes her hand, and the rat stiffens) And I passed years developing the skills that would lead to my escape. (fade back to a close up of Hama in the present) Bloodbending. Controlling the water in another body. (Katara stares at her in horror) Enforcing your own will over theirs. (fade to the flashback to a shot of young Hama controlling five elephant rats with her hand) Once I had mastered the rats, I was ready for the men...

(Cut to a profile shot of a prison guard walking down the walkway. He suddenly stops and his body begins to jerk unnaturally. He watches with fright as his own hand moves on its own and grabs the keys at his belt and he is dragged forward. Cut to a shot of Hama pulling the guards in with her bending and forcing him to unlock her cell. Cut to a shot of the guard falling to the floor. Hama jumps out of her cell behind him.)

Hama: (voiceover) And during the next full moon, I walked free for the first time in decades. (the guard tries to get up, but Hama presses her hand down, forcing him back down. Hama walks away, her legs unsteady and wobbly from months of inactivity) My cell unlocked by the very guards assigned to keep me in. (the scene flashes white and returns to a shot of Hama and Katara) Once you perfect this technique, you can control anything... or anyone.

Katara: (uneasy) But, to reach inside someone and control them? I don't know if I want that kind of power.
Hama: The choice is not yours. The power exists...and it's your duty to use the gifts you've been given to win this war. Katara, they tried to wipe us out, our entire culture... your mother!
Katara: I know.
Hama: Then you should understand what I'm talking about. We're the last Waterbenders of the Southern Tribe. We have to fight these people whenever we can. Wherever they are, with any means necessary!
Katara: It's you. You're the one who's making people disappear during the full moons.
Hama: They threw me in prison to rot, along with my brothers and sisters. They deserve the same. You must carry on my work.
Katara: (defiant) I won't! I won't use bloodbending, and I won't allow you to keep terrorizing this town.

(Katara points her finger at Hama, but her arms twists to one side, then the other side, and behind her back. Katara grabs her arm and tries to stop it.)

Hama: You should have learned the technique before you turned against me. (makes Katara stand straight up, stiff) It's impossible to fight your way out of my grip. I control every muscle, every vein in your body.

(Hama uses bloodbending to twist Katara's body around and throw her from side to side. Cut to Hama's point of view as she causes Katara's body to twitch and jerk erratically, her hands in the foreground. Cut to a close up of Hama as she slowly brings her hands down, smiling sadistically. Katara is forced down to her knees. Tears begin to form in her eyes.)

Katara: Stop...please.

(Hama cackles sinisterly. Cut to a shot of the full moon. Fade to a close up of Katara looking down, tears streaming down her face. Cut to a close up of her hands on the ground. She clenches her fists, and the grass around them shrivels and dies. Cut back to the close up of Katara as she lifts her eyes at Hama
in anger. Cut to Hama as her smile quickly fades and her laughter ends. Katara stands back up and takes a deep breath, lifting her hands.)

Katara: You're not the only one who draws power from the moon. My bending is more powerful than yours, Hama. Your technique is useless on me!

(Hama and Katara both enter their battle stances. Katara lifts her arms up and bends the water out of the grass and into a ring around her. She hops forward, spins once, and flings the water at Hama. Hama takes the water with her bending and redirects the attack back at Katara. Katara skillfully takes the water back, spins back around, and flings the water back again, countering the counter-attack. Hama extracts the water from two trees, creating two large torrents, and throws them forward before taking Katara's attack and flinging it back again. The three torrents all form one massive torrent of water and fly towards Katara. Katara steps back and presses her hand forward, blocking the attack. The scene goes into slow motion as the water is completely blocked, exploding into a spectacular shower of droplets. Cut to a close up Katara, the droplets reflecting her eyes, then to Hama, the droplets reflecting her shock and fear.

The scene goes back to full speed as Katara dashes forward and circles her arms inward. The water hanging in the air is bent into two torrents, one hitting Hama head, the other her feet, spinning her in mid air like a yin-yang and knocking her down as she yells. Hama slowly rises up as Sokka and Aang run into the area.)

Sokka: We know what you've been doing, Hama!
Aang: Give up, you're outnumbered.
Hama: No. You've outnumbered yourselves.

(Hama raises both arms and Aang and Sokka's bodies stiffen. Hama flings them at Katara. Katara leaps between the two, dodging them, gathers more water from the grass and flings it at Hama as she rises. Hama extracts the water from another tree and creates a massive spinning wheel of water in front of her body to forcibly block the attack. Katara is ready for more when Sokka comes at her with his sword.)

Sokka: Katara, look out! It's like my brain has a mind of its own. Stop it, arm, stop it!

(Hama waves her arms to the side, controlling Sokka and making Katara back away. Katara extracts more water from the grass and knocks Sokka away with it. Aang is then controlled at is forced to attack Katara.)

Aang: This feels weird.

(Katara smashes the water hard into Aang, knocking him into a tree. Katara throws the water at Aang and freezes it, pinning him to the tree.)

Katara: I'm sorry, Aang.
Aang: (off screen) It's ok.

(Hama bloodbends Sokka to attack again. Cut to a close up of Sokka swinging
his sword, his face full of fear. Katara quickly extracts the water from a sapling and flings it at Sokka's sword arm. He is sent flying back and hits a tree. Katara freezes the water and pins him there. Cut to a close up of Hama.)

Hama: Don't hurt your friends, Katara... and don't let them hurt each other.

(The camera zooms out to a shot of Hama with her arms outstretched. She lowers her stance and pulls her arms in. Aang and Sokka are both pulled off the trees, and are sent flying towards each other. Sokka's sword is pointed forward intended to impale Aang. Both of them scream in terror. Cut to a close up of Katara.)

Katara: No!

(Sokka and Aang both stop just before the sword can pierce the airbender. Both stare at their hands, realizing they have control again. They look to Hama, who stiffens and twitches, full of fear. Cut to a close up of Katara, her hands stretched outward, bloodbending Hama. Katara is shocked at first, then slowly brings her hands down, forcing Hama to her knees. Hama struggles to get back up, but glances back when Toph and the prisoners arrive. The scene cuts to a close up of Hama's hands being bound by shackles. The camera quickly zooms out to a shout of everyone surrounding her.)

1st Prisoner: You're going to be locked away forever.

(Two of the prisoners begin to lead Hama away.)

Hama: My work is done. (cut to a close up as she turns her head to Katara) Congratulations, Katara. You're a bloodbender.

(Cut to and zoom in on Katara as she puts a hand to her mouth and slowly begins to cry. Cut back to Hama as she begins to laugh with evil. The prisoners take her away and Katara drops to her knees. Cut to a shot of Katara sobbing, with Aang and Sokka resting their hands on her shoulder to comfort her. Their backs are to the camera, and it zooms in on the full moon hanging overhead.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" includes clips from "The Awakening", "The Beach", "The Library", and "The Earth King".]



Act I

(After the preview, the camera pans upward over a field of sleeping Koala-Sheep. Appa, Aang, Sokka, Katara, Toph and Momo come into the scene through a large hedge. Cut to closer shot of Sokka and his friends.)

Sokka: (looking at a map) This is it, the official rendezvous point for the invasion force.

(Camera pans over mountains and fields of Koala-Sheep)

Toph: How did you pick this place?
Sokka: Before we split up, my dad and I found this island on a map. It's
uninhabited, and the harbor (cut to aerial shot of the cliff face) surrounded by cliffs seemed like the perfect secluded place.
Katara: (cut to close-up ground level shot of the gang preparing for bed) Nice choice Sokka. And we're here four days ahead of schedule.
Aang: (shocked) Wait, (shoots out of bed and high into the air) four days! (close up of Aang's horrified face) The invasion's in four days!
Sokka: (close shot of the inside of Sokka's mouth, which pan's out to reveal him yawning) Whatever. (nonchalant) That's like... four days from now. (lays back onto his mat) Let's just calm down, and ... (snore)

(Cut to Sokka sleeping in the fore ground. Katara and Aang are in the background)

Katara: Sokka's got the right idea Aang. We're here, we're ready... (lays down on her mat) the best thing we can do now is get plenty of rest.

(close-up shot of Aang.)

Aang: Uh.. (looks around frantically but everyone seems to be asleep) I guess.

(Aang curls up on the grass. The camera zooms in on his face and the scene fades to black)

(The scene fade back in with a close shot of a large ornate Fire Nation symbol, it pans backward quickly, revealing that it is a large, ornate and intimidating door. The door busts open, revealing a boy with large hair, a headband and a yellow/orange jump suit with his back to us. He enters the room with a series of dramatic gestures. It is revealed that it is actually Aang who is in this strange garb. Aang takes an intense jump on to a rock tower. Cut to wider shot of Aang standing on the rock tower surrounded by floating broken pillars.)

Aang: (continually making a series of comically fast and dramatic ninja-like moves during this speech) Your days of tyranny are over Fire Lord. I'm bringing you down!

(Cut to close shot of an elaborately dressed Fire Lord with Kabuki-like facial features. He is about to take a bite of a bundle of grapes, but stops and looks down at who ever is disturbing him. The camera pans out quickly to reveal he is actually a giant when compared to Aang and surrounded by a pit of fire.)

Fire Lord Ozai: Really, (bends his giant face close to Aang's) how do you plan on doing that (cut to Aang's horrified face) when you're not even wearing pants!

(Aang looks down to discover this is true and screams. He quickly covers himself with a fuzzy white water tribe shield pulled out of thin air. The camera pans out to a larger shot of Aang shaking with embarrassment. Suddenly, giant eyes begin to appear all around him. The eye's close and disappear back into the walls. Cut to shot of the giant Fire Lord laughing as Aang slowly backs out the door. The Fire Lord raises his arms to the ceiling, while surrounded by flames, laughing heartily.)

Aang: (cut to shot of Aang waking up startled) Uah! (Aang feels all around to make sure he is wearing pants, and then sighs with relief. Momo approaches him) It was just a dream Momo, I still have my pants. (cut to wide ground shot of Aang getting up) Well, I better keep training.

(Close shot of Aang with an extremely intense look on his face. The camera pans out to reveal he is kicking a bush. Wide shot of Momo looking on at Aang kicking the bush. Momo's ears go down in a gesture of displeasure and he curls up for sleep.)

(Cut to wide shot of an elaborate Fire Nation palace. Cut to shot of servants carrying a robe, which is placed around and buttoned onto Prince Zuko.)

1st Servant: (a servant steps forward with a bowl) Fresh fruit, Prince Zuko? (Zuko gestures him away)
2nd Servant: (eagerly) May I wash your feet, sir? (Zuko again gestures a decline)
1st Servant: Head massage? (Zuko looks away)
2nd Servant: (close shot of some neatly bundled and steaming towels) Hot towel?

(Zuko looks at this option a little longer, sighs and then picks up a towel, rubs his face and places it back on the plate of towels. The servant bows and smiles. Aerial shot of large elaborate gate opening as prince Zuko walks through. He is greeting by a large crowd of admirers and giggling females. Cut to shot of Zuko looking pleased. Cut to shot of a large, awkward looking girl. She gets overly excited by Zuko's entrance and must be restrained by the guards. Cut back to shot of Zuko, who is approached from behind by some servants carrying a beautiful and elaborate Palanquin.)

Palanquin Servant: Prince Zuko, is something wrong? You didn't take the palanquin.
Zuko: I'm just going to Mai's house, it's not far.
Palanquin Servant: It's not a Prince's place to walk anywhere, sir.

(Cut to close shot of a pensive Zuko, looking across the courtyard and then back at the Palanquin. He smirks and approaches the Palanquin. Cut to a wide shot of the Palanquin being carried a comically short distance to Mai's large residence. Cut to shot of Zuko sitting inside. He pulls back the curtain and smiles at Mai, who waves from a large ornate doorway.)

(Cut to shot of the top of a tree shaking. The camera pans down to reveal a shirtless Aang punching the tree. Cut to close shot of Aang looking extremely intense and concentrated on this task. Cut to a shot of the others slowly waking up from the sound of the punching. Katara, looking drowsy turns, toward Sokka. Sokka shrugs and Katara gets up. She approaches a very fierce looking Aang from behind.)

Katara: Hey, how long have you been up?
Aang: A couple hours. (Aang circles the tree, doing some fancy footwork and varying the type of punches) I got a lot more skills to refine if I'm going to fight Ozai.
Katara: (close shot of Aang, very out of breath) You know there is such a thing as over-training.

(Aang gives a final extremely hard punch, which reverberates through his body in a comedic fashion. He falls backward, stuck in his punching position. After a pause, the all the leaves fall from the tree at once. Cut to shot of Katara looking on in disbelieve. Sokka's and Toph's heads pop out from behind her. Cut to close sot of Aang, eyes wide, with gray bags under them. He holds up his hands in a defensive pose. Leaves fly from his body.)

Aang: You don't get it, do you? (Aang circles Katara, who looks half frightened half amused, as Aang does a variety of air punches and defensive maneuvers) My form is bad. I'm sloppy. And I still don't know any firebending, not even the basics.

(Aang's eye twitches. Cut to shot of Katara, moving Aang's hand away from her face with a worried smile. Cut to shot of Sokka relaxing on the grass looking at his map.)

Sokka: That's okay Aang. The eclipse will block all firebending anyway, you don't need to know any. (he looks toward Aang) Plus it's a stupid element.
Aang: Okay, (raises his arms and then begins a series of comic and sloppy attempts at chops, punches and kicks) well, I still have to work on everything else. I'd better spend the whole day training.

(Aang bows quickly toward everyone and then creates an air ball and rides away on it. Cut to Sokka looking worried and then hiding his face behind the map. Toph sits bored in the background, totally unaffected by everything that has gone on that morning.)

(Cut to night. Aang slinks back to camp in a zombie like fashion. He turns to the camera, gives a long yawn and falls back onto the ground.)

Aang: (wide shot of the group on the cliffside) Good night Katara. Good night Sokka. Good night Toph. Good night Appa. Good night Momo. Good night Appa and Momo.

(A large speech bubble emerges with a very angry chibi Toph inside.)

Toph: (yelling) Go to sleep already!

(Cut to Aang cringing, and then laying back relaxed. His eyes slowly close and the camera pans upward into darkness.)

(Cut to shot of Aang busting through the same large Fire Nation door from his previous dream. He is again dressed in odd clothing. This time he has chains, a high collared yellow vest, a headband, boots and spiky hair. He snaps, and dramatic fog enters through the doors. He runs through the room and jumps to the rock tower opposite the fire lord.)

Aang: (He points coolly) Your days of tyranny are over Fire Lord. I'm bringing you down... and this time I brought pants. (The camera pans down to reveal the chains are meant to lock on the pants)
Fire Lord Ozai: (Cut to very close shot of the Fire Lord) So it seems. (He stands up and a giant abacus falls from the ceiling) But are you prepared for your mathematics test?
Aang: (close shot of Aang in a panic) Math test?! Oh no! (he turns toward the camera) I forgot all about the math test! (Aang falls through the air yelling, and is crushed between the giant abacus beads. He wakes up startled, sweat dripping from his brow.) I've got to be ready!

(Aang gets up and walks away. Cut to shot of Aang circling some sleeping Koala-Sheep, practicing various defensive moves. Katara approaches.)

Katara: Aang, it's the middle of the night. You need to go back to sleep.
Aang: (ground level shot of Aang looking wild and still concentrated on the Koala-Sheep) But I forgot my pants and my math test.
Katara: (Katara sighs, and then breathes in deeply, she moves forward and grabs Aang's shoulders. Aang's very bloodshot eyes turn toward her) Aang, sleep. Please...for me.

(Shot of Aang looking confused and rubbing his eyes. Katara leads him back toward their camp. A Koala-Sheep bleats after them.

Cut to very wide aerial shot of the Fire Nation Palace and it's surroundings area. Cut to shot of Zuko and Mai lying down together on an ornate couch.)

Zuko: Tell me, if you can have anything you wanted right now, what would it be?
Mai: Hmm. A big fancy fruit tart, with rose petals on top.
Zuko: (cut to close up shot of Zuko and Mai) You know, being a prince and all, I might just be able to make that happen.
Mai: (giggles) That would be impressive.

(Shot of two fire nation servants in a curtained doorway. The back of the couch lies in the center of the scene. Zuko and Mai sit up come into view.)

Zuko: Do you think (the guards turn towards the couple and bow) you can find a fresh fruit tart for the lady, with rose petals on top.
Royal Servant: (shot of the two guards bowing) Excellent choice, sir.
Mai: (close shot of Zuko and Mai. The camera begins to pan out slowly) I guess there are some perks that come with being royalty. (they lie back down) Though, there is annoying stuff too, like that all-day war meeting coming up.
Zuko: (Zuko sits up completely, surprised, and turns toward Mai, who is also surprised) War meeting? What are you talking about?
Mai: Azula mentioned something, (Zuko turns away and looks down. Cut to close shot of Mai speaking to a disgruntled Zuko) I assumed you were going too.
Zuko: (closes his eyes and turns away) I guess I wasn't invited.

(Aerial shot of the rendezvous point where Aang and the others are staying. Cut to a close up shot of Aang asleep on the grass.)

Fire Lord Ozai: Wake up Aang. (Aang's eyes begin to open. Cut to an out of focus swaying shot of the Fire Lord standing over Aang Wake up sleepy-head. Rise and shine. You over-slept. (The Fire Lord bends in close, and then even closer) You missed the invasion.

(He laughs and then the shot pans out to reveal he is riding on a flying hippo pig. The creature breaths fire and flies skywards as the Fire Lord laughs menacingly. Cut to shot of Aang waking up in a panic. He turns to Sokka who is still sound asleep and shakes him vigorously.)

Aang: Sokka get up! I need to know what day it is! (Aang pulls on Sokka's eyelids and lips in a comedic fashion.)
Sokka: What?! (jumps up) Who's talking?! (Sokka thrusts forward with his sword, but hits a rock head-on before he can complete his swing. He falls back on to his sleeping mat, his body stiff, frozen in the swinging position)
Toph: (cut to Toph sitting up, Katara visible in the background) Relax, it's still two days before the invasion.
Aang: (cut to Aang hopping around the sleepy Sokka, tugging on various limbs) Sokka, you've got to get up and drill your rock climbing exercises.
Sokka: What?
Aang: (cut to close shot of Aang, looking unfocused and tired. He makes overly large comedic gestures during his speech and often looks confused) In one of my dreams, you were running from fire nation soldiers, trying to climb this cliff, but you (cut to close shot of Sokka looking disgruntled) were too slow and they got you. (Sokka springs up to stand before Aang)
Sokka: But that was just a dream, (points at Aang) I'm a great climber.

(Cut to shot of Aang and Sokka standing at the bottom of a cliff.)

Aang: (points upward) Then climb that cliff. Climb it fast!

(The camera pans upward to reveal the cliff is quite large and steep. The camera pans back down to show Sokka looking up at the cliff summit, looking back at Aang and then pointing to himself. Aang nods and Sokka slinks off toward the cliff. Cut to close shot of Sokka beginning to climb.)

Sokka: (annoyed) Stupid Avatar. Stupid cliff. Stupid dream! I can climb fast!

(Aang looks pleased and relieved at Sokka's climbing. Suddenly he turns around to Katara and Toph. Toph has just put her lips to a satchel of water.)

Aang: (Yells, causing Sokka to startle and slip down the cliff face) Don't drink that!

(Cut to shot of Toph and Katara sitting. Toph throws away the satchel and spits the water all over Katara, who is disgusted.)

Toph: (perturbed) Why, is it poisoned? (an annoyed Katara water bends the water off herself)

(Cut to Aang approaching the girls. His eyes are crossed.)

Aang: In my dream, we were right in the middle of the invasion, and you had to stop to use the bathroom. We died because of your tiny bladder. (Aang
mimics holding his bladder) And you (addressing Katara) need to start wearing your hair up. (Aang gestures his hair and then starts pulling and stretching his forehead) In my dream, your hair got caught in a train, and...
Katara: (cut to Katara holding Aang's cheek) Aang, I know you're just trying to help. But you really need to get a grip. You're unraveling.

(The camera pans in on Aang who looks around unsettled. He looks extremely tired and has dark circles under his eyes. Aang lets out a sigh.)

Aang: You're right. I'm losing my mind.

(The camera pans over to Sokka, who is nearly to the top of the cliff. He suddenly slides down.)

Sokka: Ahhh!



Act II

(The scene opens with the sun beating down. Cut to a extreme close up of Aang's twitching eye.)

Aang: It's like every time I think about how stressed I am, (Cut to shot of Aang twittering his fingers in a nervous fashion) I just end up more stressed. (Cut to wide shot of Aang pacing back and forth. His friends sit in the background. They are absorbed in their own tasks and seem to be ignoring Aang's ravings) I'm like a big, growing snowball of nerves.
Sokka: (turning toward Aang) Of course you are. That's 'cause you've got to fight the Fire Lord, (extreme close shot of Aang's horrified face) the baddest man on the planet. And you better win, or we're all done for. (The camera pans left to reveal an angry Katara standing up and turning to Sokka)
Katara: Sokka, you're not helping!
Sokka: (standing up) What? It's true. That's the deal, he knows it. (Katara pushes Sokka to a sitting position angrily)

(Cut to close shot of Katara looking on at Aang worried. Cut to shot of Aang shaking and chattering with fear. Katara approaches him.)

Katara: You know what? I've got just the thing. (places her arms on Aang's shoulders, smiling) Get ready to be "de-stress-i-fied". (Cut to wide shot of the outside of a steaming crater. Cut to shot of Aang and Katara standing beside the steaming water inside the crater) These yoga stretches can really work wonders if you do them in extreme heat. Reach up. (Aang and Katara reach upward) Reach for the sun. (Aang and Katara sway from side to side) Feel your chi paths clearing. (They bend over and touch their heads to the ground) Now close your eyes. How are you feeling?
Aang: (cut to close up shot of Aang upside down. The camera spins and pans inward, in a dizzying motion) I feel...really warm.
Katara: Good, good. Go on.
Aang: Like there's the warm feeling all around me. This heat... like I'm in the Fire Lord's palace, and he's shooting a bunch of fire balls at me. And the whole world is being engulfed in flames. (flames shoot across the scene and spiral inward. There is a flash. Cut to Aang rolling out of the yoga position and on to his back. Katara looks up and the tired and out of breath Aang)
Katara: Maybe your stress is the kind you need to talk out.

(Cut to shot of clear blue skies and the green fields of the cliff face. Cut to closer shot of Aang laying his head on a Koala-Sheep. Sokka sits beside him dawning the 'Wang Fire' beard. His elbows are propped up on a Koala-Sheep. He looks pensive.)

Sokka: (speaking in a mocking, old man sounding, psychiatric tone) Why don't you get right down to business and tell me what's been bothering you.
Aang: (close aerial shot of Aang looking disgruntled) You know what's bothering me. I have to fight the Fire Lord in a few days.

(Cut to close shot of Sokka.)

Sokka: Mhm. (nods and gestures toward Aang) Tell me more about this, 'Fire Lord.' Why are you so afraid of him?
Aang: (The camera pans over a wider aerial shot of Aang, Sokka and the Koala-Sheep) You said it yourself. He's the baddest man on the planet. I'm supposed to defeat him and save the world.
Sokka: Hmm. (close shot of Sokka with his eyes closed and nodding deeply) Life does feel that way some times, doesn't it? (cut back to shot of Aang, now getting frustrated) Like we're all trying to save the world from evil.
Aang: Okay, but what can I do to feel better?
Sokka: Want to try screaming into this pillow?

(Close shot of Aang being presented with a fluffy Koala-Sheep. Aang screams into it and the Koala-Sheep bleats comically. Sokka scratches his head and then gives Aang the thumbs up sign and nods. Aang shakes his head indicating the negative.

Cut to an up close shot of some long black hair in a pool of water. An ornate gold comb brushes though the hair. The camera pans right to reveal that it is Azula's hair that's being combed. Cut to wide shot of the ornate palace room. Zuko approaches Azula.)

Azula: Hello Zu-zu. If you've come for a royal hair combing, I'm afraid you'll have to wait.

(Cut to close shot of Zuko standing over Azula.)

Zuko: So I guess there's a big war meeting coming up, huh. And apparently I'm not welcome there.
Azula: What do you mean? Of course you're welcome there.
Zuko: (close shot of Zuko, perturbed) Oh yeah? I guess that's why no one bothered to tell me about it.

(Cut to close shot of Azula and the two maids brushing her hair. Azula eyes Zuko.)

Azula: Oh Zuko, don't be so dramatic. I'm certain Dad wants you there. You probably weren't invited, because it's so obvious that you're supposed to be there.
Zuko: (close up on Zuko, questioning) Well, were you invited?
Azula: (close shot of Azula, looking smug) Of course. I'm the Princess.
Zuko: (annoyed) And I'm the Prince!
Azula: Exactly, so stop acting (gestures) like a paranoid child. (close up shot of Zuko looking annoyed) Just go to the meeting.
Zuko: Forget it, I'm not going.

(Zuko walks out of the room. Cut to a shot of Aang laying on a bed of pillar shaped rocks with his eyes closed. Toph stands next to him.)

Toph: Alright, what you need is a good old fashioned back poundin' to relieve your stress.
Aang: Pound away. (Toph begins to stomp her feet causing the pillars to pummel Aang) Ahh! Ow! Uh! Toph! (close shot of Aang in serious pain) I ... think ... this ... is ... bruising ... me! (Toph stops and Aang falls off the bed of rock pillars)
Toph: Sorry, I forgot you have baby skin. (close shot of Toph looking pensive) Well, there's one other thing we can try... (Toph stomps and a porcupine flies into her hand from a nearby bush. It uncurls and bears its needles. Toph gives a large grin) acupuncture!
Aang: (Aang looks at the porcupine, screams and runs away) Ahhhh!

(Cut to shot of Zuko looking out an open window. Mai approaches him from behind.)

Mai: Zuko, it's just a dumb meeting. Who cares?
Zuko: I don't.

(Close up shot of Mai talking to Zuko, while Zuko still looks out into the distance.)

Mai: Well good. You shouldn't. Why would you even want to go? (Cut to shot of Zuko and Mai standing in the window, the Fire Nation Palace before them. Mai puts her arm around Zuko) Just think about how things went to the last war meeting you went to.
Zuko: (sighs)I know.
Mai: (cut to shot of Mai, circling Zuko, attempting to distract him) You know what will make you feel better? Ordering some servants around! I might be hungry for a whole tray of fruit tarts! And maybe a little palanquin ride around town... Double time!

(Zuko looks away from Mai. Mai backs away from him, looking worried.

Cut to shot wide shot of Appa and the others at their camp. Cut to close shot of Aang sitting in a curled up position, looking sickly.)

Aang: Thanks for everything guys.
Katara: (Cut to shot of Katara and the others looking toward Aang with smiles) So do you feel less stressed? Ready for a good night sleep?
Aang: (close shot of Aang looking confused) Uhh...I kinda think I sorta might ... slightly feel a little better ... maybe.
Sokka: (cut to shot of Sokka) Then our work here is done.

(Sokka yawns, stretches and falls back onto his sleeping mat. The others do the same. Aang is the only one left awake and alone. Aang lays back and closes his eyes and the scene fades to black.)

(Cut to a red hued scene of Aang flying Appa through a huge storm. Some giant arms swing at him but he dodges them. It is revealed to be a giant Momo that is attacking them. Momo grabs Appa and Aang. Cut to shot of Aang breaking through cement in front of the Fire Nation Castle. Aang is transported to the front steps, through the door and down some hallways in a choppy dream-like horror sequence. Cut to close up shot of Aang's eye. A creepy image of Toph flashes in his pupil. Cut to shot of the creepy Toph, she floats close to him and her hair blows out of her face to reveal that she has no eyes! Cut to shot of Toph falling through the floor and Aang looking scared.

Cut to shot of Sokka running though a tunnel. Some gooey tentacles reach for him, he struggles but they swallow him up. Cut to a close up shot of a scared Katara. Fire flashes in her eyes. Fire surrounds her. Aang attempts to save her but is bound at his feet by ice. The ice crawls up his whole body leaving him frozen. Cut to shot of Aang frozen on an ice cliff. A large fire in the shape of the fire lord looms over him, cackling madly. It bites at Aang causing him to melt and he falls into a deep abyss and then into a pool of water.

The scene flips upside down and Aang swims upward only to discover he is trapped under ice. He pounds at the ice as Prince Zuko stands over him motionless. Sozin's comet flies by Zuko's head in the background. Cut to close shot of the comet. Cut to close shot of Aang holding his breath under the ice. Cut to close shot of the comet speeding downward. Cut to close shot of Momo. Momo holds his finger to his lips and whispers 'Shhh'. Cut to shot of Aang floating and overlooking a beautiful valley. Suddenly, the comet hits the valley, turning everything to black and gray. The scene fades to white and then comes back and the Valley is now nothing but fire and lava. )

(Cut to scene of Aang waking up and screaming. He continues to scream. Cut to shot of everyone waking up. Cut to shot of Appa jumping with fright, causing Momo to fall off his back. Katara, Toph and Sokka rush over.)

Katara: (worried) What happened Aang?
Aang: (Aang turns away from his friends and slumps over, bowing his head to the ground) It's the nightmares. They just get worse and worse.
Sokka: (cut to close shot of Sokka) Looks like it's time for... (he spins around and now dons the 'Wang Fire' beard) another therapy session.
Aang: (Aang looks up at him, disgusted and then turns around and speaks angrily) No, that won't help. Nothing helps. (close shot of Aang looking determined) There's only one thing I can do. I'm going to stay awake straight through to the invasion.

(Aang twitches, and the camera pans up to see Katara's shocked face and Sokka's beard fall off. Toph seems to find this amusing.)



Act III

(The scene opens with Katara stretching on a scenic cliff above the ocean. Aang stumbles into the scene in a zombie like trance and nearly stumbles.)

Aang: Invasion. All aboard for the invasion.
Katara: You don't look so good. (approaches Aang) You sure you can't just lie down for a little nap?
Aang: (cut to close up shot of Aang turning towards Katara) I told you, I can't go back to sleep.

(Cut to wide shot of the two of them, a scenic sunset on the ocean is in the background.)

Katara: Aang, staying up can't be good for you.
Aang: Actually staying up all night has given me some time to think. (Aang walks toward the ocean, Katara follows him) And I've realized some big things Katara.
Katara: (close up shot of Katara) What big things?
Aang: (looking out into the sunset) I see everything so clearly now... what really matters. Why I'm really doing this. I'm doing it to save the world, (turns toward Katara) but more than that. I'm doing it for the people I love. (close up shot of Aang stepping right up to Katara) I'm doing it for you Katara.
Katara: Aang, what are you saying?
Aang: I'm saying...I love you.

(Aang kisses Katara. Katara looks shocked, then smiles and kisses Aang back, throwing her arms around him. Cut to a wide shot of the two of them kissing in the sunset. Cut to close up shot of the kiss. They pull apart.)

Katara: What are we doing?
Aang: What our hearts (lifts arms into the air in a grand gesture) have been telling us to do for a long, long time. Baby, (swings Katara on to her back and goes in for another kiss) you're my forever girl.

(Close up shot of Aang with comically huge, puffy and drool strewn lips making a kiss face.)

Katara: Aang?
Aang: Huh?

(The scene pans out to reveal Aang is holding and kissing air. Katara is standing behind him looking at him strangely.)

Katara: I was just saying you should take a nap.
Aang: Oh, (straightens up and faces Katara) I guess I kinda drifted off into a day-dream.
Katara: What was your dream about?
Aang: (looks embarrassed) Uhh, living under water?
Katara: (looks skeptical, then smiles) Sounds neat.
Aang: (close up shot of Aang breathing a sigh of relief) Heh. Phew.

(Cut to an outside wide shot of Mai's House. Cut to close up shot of Prince Zuko. The camera pans out to reveal he is laying on the couch. Mai sits next to him pouring tea. A servant enters.)

Messenger: Prince Zuko, (bows to the ground) everyone's waiting for you.
Zuko: (Zuko and Mai approach him) What?
Messenger: The high admirals, high generals, the war ministers, and the princess have all arrived. (close up shot of the messenger raising his head to Zuko) You're the only person missing.
Zuko: (close up shot of Zuko and Mai. Mai is smiling) So, my dad wants me at the meeting?
Royal Messenger: The Fire Lord said he would not start until you arrived, sir. (bows his head again)

(Zuko smiles and looks towards Mai, still smiling. Cut to shot of Aang hiding in the bushes. He jumps out, does a somersault and hides against a rock. He pops out from behind the rock.)

Aang: Put 'em up, Fire Lord.

(Cut to shot of Sokka's noodle Ozai picture and a red target fastened to a tree. Aang shoots a kick of Air at it and misses, knocking Sokka to the ground.)

Sokka: Hey, I'm trying to build Appa some armor here so he doesn't have to go into the invasion naked. He's your bison ...
Aang: (close up shot of Aang, his arm reached out in front of him at some imaginary enemy) Ozai's defense is impeccable. I'll have to try a different approach. (Aang jumps up into the air with a yell and beings to shoot balls of air down at the noodle Ozai. All 4 shots miss.) You think you're untouchable, don't you Mr. Fire Lord.

(Aang approaches the noodle drawing but a strange voice speaks from behind him)

Voice: Boy, you are really starting to lose it kid.

(Aang turns around to see Momo sitting there on a rock.)

Aang: Momo, did you hear something.

(Aang turns back around, but the voice comes again.)

Momo: No, but I said something.
Aang: Uhh. (Aang bends in toward Momo looking very confused. Cut to close shot of Momo)
Momo: You my friend are just a few plumbs short of a fruit pie.

(Cut to close up shot of Aang looking at Momo in disbelief. He backs away and shakes his head vigorously. He covers his eyes and then peeks through them. Momo is speaking in his normal animal language again.)

Aang: That's more like it. (pets Momo) I'm so tired, that for a second there I imagined you were talking to me. (Momo cocks his head to one side as if he is confused) Oh, Momo... let me explain.

(Cut to shot of Aang attempting to speak Momo's animal language. Toph, Katara and Sokka stand in the background looking very confused and worried. Momo and Aang seem to be carrying on their own private conversation. Aang even laughs a few times.)

Katara: Aang (Aang and Momo look up in surprise. Cut to shot of Katara.) We're all starting to get a little worried about you.
Sokka: (camera pans right to Sokka) You've been awake too long.
Toph: (camera pans right to Toph) And you're acting downright weird.
Appa: (camera pans right to Appa, who is standing on his hind legs like a human and pointing his finger as if to give a lecture) You've got to take care of yourself. You can't go on like this.
Aang: Uhh. (bows his head, frustrated, and then lifts his finger to make a point. Cut to wide scene of Aang talking to everyone. Appa is still standing there like a human) I appreciate what you guys are saying. But the stress and the nightmares, they were too much. Staying awake is the best way for me to deal with it.
Momo: (Momo stands up and points his finger at Appa) Yeah, leave the kid alone.
Appa: (Appa points back down at Momo, looking Angry) Hey, who asked you?

(Wide shot of Aang and Momo snarling at one another)

Aang: Guys...come on.
Appa: (Close up shot of Appa looking angry) No! I'm sick of this guy always mouthing off, (Cut to shot of Momo who is very mad and telling me what to do.
Aang: Oh, you don't like i? Well let's go right now.

(Cut to close up shot of Aang running up to Sokka and grabbing on to his shirt collar.)

Aang: Sokka, what should we do?
Sokka: About what?
Aang: About that! (turns toward Appa and Momo)

(Cut to shot of Momo dressed in Samurai garb. Momo scratches his cheek. Cut to shot of Appa in full Samurai outfit. He looks intense and holds three swords. Appa draws his swords. Cut to close shot of Momo looking intense. Momo draws his swords. Cut to Appa rushing with swords out toward Momo. Cut to Momo screeching and rushing, with his sword out toward, Appa. They meet in the middle, there swords pressed together in a battle of strength. Cut to shot of a crowd of cheering Koala-Sheep.)

Koala Sheep: Appa! Appa! Appa!

(Cut to another crowd of cheering Koala-Sheep on the opposite side.)

Koala Sheep: Momo! Momo! Momo!

(Cut to shot of Momo peering behind him at Appa, both are ready for the next attack, swords drawn. Appa draws his many swords and suddenly turns into a giant tornado! He spins towards Momo. Momo is able to defend his attacks. Cut to shot of Aang walking up to the scene, looking confused and worried.)

Aang: Come on guys, (cut to shot of Momo and Appa fighting with a ring of Koala-Sheep cheering around them. Aang stands outside the ring trying to get everyone's attention) we're all on the same side!

(A multi-armed Guru Pathik floats into the scene on a cloud. He is playing a sitar-like instrument and singing merrily, while Appa and Momo continue their sword fight in the background. Aang stands before it all in disbelief.)

Guru Pathik: Chakras, chakras, everybody loves chakras! (Cut to close shot of the Guru. A golden light surrounds his head. He bends in towards the camera and licks his lips) Chakras, chakras... chakra sandwich tastes good, yum!

(Cut to shot of Appa and Momo in some very intense fighting. Cut to close up shot of the Koala-Sheep cheering them on.)

Koala Sheep: Yay! Yay! Yay! Yay! Yay!

(Cut to close up shot of Aang's confused eyes. Cut to a wider shot of the forest. Suddenly some snake-like lines of rocks move on their own towards the field. Aang looks down at the rock snakes confused. One of them circles around him and then drifts away.)

Aang: Huh? Huh!

(Cut to shot of the crowd of Koala-Sheep cheering.)

Koala Sheep: Yay! Yay! Yay!

(Cut to shot of the tree Aang used earlier for target practice. It still has Sokka's noodle Ozai on the face. It also wears a red target apron. It has taken on human like limbs and shape and begins to dance around and throw some punches. Cut to wide shot of the entire scene. Appa and Momo still fight in the background. The rock snakes have risen up into slithering pillars. Aang is surrounded by a ring of rocks and a ring of cheering Koala-Sheep. Cut to close shot of Aang looking panicked.)

Aang: (yelling) I just need a jump in a cold waterfall.

(Aang screams and runs out of the scene into the forest.

Cut to shot of the Fire Nation Palace. Cut to shot of Zuko exiting the war meeting. A few Men and women are chatting outside in the background, Azula among them. Cut to shot of Mai leaning on a pillar. Zuko enters the scene and she follows him.)

Mai: So, how did it go?
Zuko: When I got to the meeting, everyone welcomed me. (cut to close up shot of Zuko) My father had saved me a seat. He wanted me next to him. (cut to wider shot of Zuko and Mai walking) I was literally at his right hand.
Mai: Zuko, that's wonderful. (grabs on to him) You must be happy?

(Zuko and Mai pause at the end of the hallway. The camera pans upward to a large ornate picture of Ozai, who is made to look incredibly powerful. Cut to shot of Zuko looking up at this picture and Mai looking concerned at him.)

Zuko: During the meeting, I was the perfect prince. (close up shot of Ozai's face in the picture) The son my father wanted. But I wasn't me. (close up shot of Zuko, he bows his head. Cut wide shot of them standing in the wide empty palace hallway.)

(Cut to shot of the rendezvous point at nighttime. Cut to shot of Aang walking, suddenly he is engulfed in a cloud of mist. In the middle of the mist is a large fluffy white pad. Aang approaches it. He comically pops around all sides of the pad, feeling and inspecting it's fluffiness. Cut to close shot of Aang, his cheek pressed to the fluffy pad. He looks at it very skeptically.)

Aang: Oh look, another hallucination. An imaginary bed, made out of clouds.

(The camera pans sideways to reveal Toph, Katara and Sokka standing there, observing Aang.)

Toph: Hey! It's real! We spent hours working on it.
Sokka: We made it for you. (the camera pans further right to reveal a herd of recently shaved and shivering Koala-Sheep.) A good night sleep will probably take the crazy away... we hope.

(Cut to shot of Aang crouched defensively on the fluffy white bed of Koala-Sheep wool. He hops off and approaches his friends.)

Aang: Look, you guys keep telling me I need to sleep, but I can't, the invasion's tomorrow.
Katara: (imploringly) Aang...
Aang: (determined) No Katara, there's still so much I haven't learned. I don't need sleep. What I need is practice. Quick, hit me. (raises his fists in a feeble attempt)
Katara: I'm not going to hit you.
Toph: (eager)You want me to do it?
Katara: Listen to me, (grabs Aang's shoulder) you've been training for this since the day we've met. I've seen your progress. You're smart, brave, and strong enough.
Aang: (close shot of Aang turning to Katara) You really think so?
Sokka: (cut to Toph and Sokka. Sokka's arms open) We all do. You can do this. You're ready.
Toph: You're the man, (points at Aang) Twinkle-toes.
Aang: Thanks guys. (close shot of Aang smiling. He yawns and Katara helps him onto the fluffy Koala-Sheep wool bed.) You know what? I think I am ready.

(The camera pans upward to black. Cut to shot of Aang breaking through the same dream door to the Fire Lord's palace. He is in yet another set of unusual yellow/orange clothing. This time he has long hair and a samurai sword. He flies into the room sword first. A giant Fire Lord stands in the fire pit as before, although this Fire Lords features are much more similar to Ozai's.)

Aang: (standing on the ledge below the Fire Lord) Your days of tyranny are over, Fire Lord.
Fire Lord Ozai: (cut to close shot of the Fire Lord) Really? You're going to take me out? You're not even wearing pants. (smiles menacingly)
Aang: (smiles slyly) No Fire Lord Ozai, (raises his sword) you're not wearing pants.
Fire Lord Ozai: (Ozai looks down and screams in surprise) No! (he covers himself with a fluffy fire nation shield) My royal parts are showing!

(Cut to shot of the floating Fire Nation dream castle. Cut to shot of Aang smiling in his bed of Koala-Sheep wool surrounded by mist. The scene fades to white.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence, including clips from "The Awakening", "Sokka's Master", "Nightmares and Daydreams" and "The Avatar and The Firelord".]



Act I

(The episode opens up to a crescent-shaped port on the island previously seen on >Nightmares and Daydreams. Cut to a shot of 3 maps overlapping one another, 2 of them are maps of the Fire Nation while the other is a map of the World. Cut to a shot of Sokka in his Water Tribe gear studying the maps with intense concentration and wiping perspiration off his forehead. A hand wearing wrist guards holding a cup appears on screen in front of Sokka and proceeds to place the cup into his hands. Camera zooms out to reveal Katara being the owner of the hand and she's donned Water Tribe gear as well. Appa is seen sleeping in the background while Toph is resting on a nearby rock in her Season 2 outfit with Momo resting at her feet. Aang jumps out and lands beside her.)

Aang: (Momo scurries to his shoulder) Top of the morning, Momo!
Katara: Sounds like you slept well.
Aang: Like a baby mooselion. I'm ready (in an attacking position) to face the Fire Lord.
Toph: So what's your strategy for taking him down? Going to get your glow on (her fingers flutter in front of her eyes) and hit him (punches the air repeatedly) with a little Avatar State action?

(Cut to a close-up shot of Aang looking down dejectedly)

Aang: I can't. When Azula shot me with lightning, my 7th chakra was locked, cutting off my connection to all the cosmic energy in the Universe.
Toph: You know what I just? heard Blah blah spiritual mumbo jumbo blah blah something about Space.

(Camera pans out to reveal something foggy near the horizon)

Katara: Oh no. Sokka, do you think the fog will delay the invasion?
Sokka: No, that is the invasion.

(Cut to the camera revealing 5 Water Tribe ships appearing out of the fog. Cut to Hakoda peering through a telescope with Bato standing beside him. Both are wearing Water Tribe warrior armor.

Cut to a shot of Aang and Toph at the port, earthbending some docks. Camera pans out to reveal an aerial view of the ships docking. Cut to Katara and Sokka running towards their father with Katara proceeding to embrace him. )

Katara: You made it Dad!
Sokka: Were you able to locate everyone I told you to find?
Hakoda: I did. But I'm a little worried, Sokka. (Looks behind at Due and Tho who are descending from the ship) Some of these men aren't exactly the warrior type.
Due: (Excited and full of energy) Whooo-wheee. This place ain't
nothing like a swamp. (Points to a rock) What'd you reckon that is, Tho? Some sort of exploding Fire Nation exploding trap that would eat ya?
Tho: It's just a rock, Due.
Due: Well, I'll be.
Hakoda: (skeptical) Is it just me, or are those fellas a little loose in the leaf head?
Bato: I just wish they would wear pants.

(Cut to Hue scratching his abdomen)

Hue: Pants are an illusion and so is death.

(Cut back to Hakoda, Bato, Katara who have confused and worried looks on their faces. Only Sokka is smiling widely. Camera fades out and reveals Katara, Aang, Toph and some swampbenders standing at the docks.)

Haru: (off screen) Hi, Katara. (Cut to a shot revealing Haru's face. He has grown some facial hair.)
Katara: Haru, (runs and embraces him) it's so good to see you.
Aang: (walking towards Haru
and giving an introduction) Toph, this is Haru. When we met him, his town was controlled by the Fire Nation. So we had to hide his earthbending.
Haru: Katara inspired me and my Father (Tyro comes into screen. Katara is seen blushing.) to take back our village.
Tyro: (places a hand on their shoulders) You helped us find our courage, Katara. Now we're here to help you.

(Cut to Toph who looks surprised)

Toph: No way. (Gets into a defensive stance) Is that... (A pair of huge hands appear on screen and carries Toph up. Camera pans out to reveal The Hippo.)
Hippo: (embracing Toph) Hippo happy to see Blind Bandit!
Toph: (angrily) You guys here for a re-match?
Boulder: (Cut to a shot of Boulder standing behind Hippo) Negatory. The Boulder and The Hippo no longer fight (making "no" gesture with his hands) for others' entertainment. Now, we fight for our Kingdom! (raises both arms up in enthusiasm.)
Toph: Sweet. (smiles)

(Camera pans out to reveal Sokka watching the whole scene a short distance away. He turns his head towards his Father. Suddenly, a boat explodes behind Sokka and Hakoda, shocking them both as they proceed to run towards it. Cut to a shot of The Mechanist appearing from the lower deck, his face covered with orange goo, coughing. Cut to a shot of Teo wheeling his wheelchair down the gangplank. His father, The Duke and Pipsqueak trail behind him.)

Sokka: Was that a new invention?

The Mechanist: Yes. (Teo is seen licking the orange goo off his hands) But unfortunately, the incendiary capabilities of peanut sauce proved to be a failure.
Sokka: You're making peanut sauce bombs?

(Cut to The Duke piggybacking on Pipsqueak's back. Their faces are covered with peanut sauce.)

Pipsqueak: They're destructive.
The Duke: (continues) And Delicious! (Both proceed to lick sauce off their faces. Momo jumps on Pipsqueak and tries to lick his face to the amusement of both boys who laugh.)
Sokka: Were you able to complete work on the plans I sent you?
The Mechanist: Yes, I was and I think the Fire Nation would be quite surprised.
Teo: Aang, (takes a pole-like object from his wheelchair) my Dad & I made this for you.

(Cut to a shot of Aang's hand taking the object.. Cut to a shot of blue "wings" popping out from the sides.)

Aang: (Camera zooms out to reveal Aang admiring his new glider) A new glider! This is amazing.
TheMechanist: And as a special feature, I added a snack compartment. (Places his head under the handle and pulls it. Peanuts tumble out of the compartment into his mouth.)
Aang: Oh well, I'm sure that will come in handy.

(Cut to a shot of the Fire Nation prison seen in The Headband. Cut to a shot of someone filing his nails.)

Warden Poon: (voice over) I bet you're tired to be in that cell, old man. (Camera zooms out to reveal Warden Poon sitting on the floor doing his grooming.) Well, too bad. (Cut to a shot of Iroh in his cell) You're never stepping outside these walls again. (A guard enters the room with a tray of food.)
Ming: Breakfast.
Warden Poon: (Stands up) Careful, Ming. Don't get too close. His stench will knock you right out. (He cackles and exits the room. Cut to a shot of Ming looking at him, annoyed.)
Ming: I snuck in some white jade tea. I know you like rare teas.
Iroh: Thank you, Ming. (takes the cup of tea) Ever since I was put in here, you have been very kind to me. (Ming tilts her head and smiles embarrassedly.)

(Cut to a shot of a group of Water Tribe warriors and Earth Kingdom soldiers having their meal. Cut to a shot of Sokka with scrolls in his hand and gulping nervously.)

Hakoda: Don't worry, you'll do great.

(Sokka takes a deep breath and walks to the platform.)

Sokka: Good morning, everyone!

(He trips and starts to pick up his fallen scrolls hurriedly.)

Sokka: Uhm... So, as you know today we're invading the Fire Nation. I mean I know you know that. (laughs nervously) Because otherwise why else would you be here Anyway... (Clumsily drops more scrolls. He picks them
up and places it on a board.) The Fire Lord's palace is here. (Points to the map) Uh no, uh wait, (flips to another map) uh wait (flips again), uh wait (flips for the final time). It's here (points to the correct map. Cut to a shot of Due, scratching his head and looking rather confused) and uh there's an eclipse today and Aang's going to fight the Fire Lord (he starts to panic) and the firebenders won't have any fire to use so that's good for us and uhm... (Cut to Teo and The Mechanist who look bored.) I'm sorry, let me start at the beginning.

(Sokka looks down and tries to compose himself.)

Sokka: (rapidly) Katara and I discovered Aang frozen in an iceberg. Now I didn't like Aang at first but I grew to love him over time. Then we went over to the Southern Air Temple where Aang used to live and then
we met Suki, who is a Kyoshi warrior. (Cut to a Water Tribe warrior yawning) She made me dress like a woman and then she kissed me

Katara: (quietly to Aang) Wow, he says beginning, he means beginning, beginning.
Sokka: ...and then Aang's friend was a crazy old man and then Katara got Haru arrested and then now he's grown a mustache (Camera pans out to reveal Hakoda approaching Sokka) and if you look in the front row you can see him...
Hakoda: Thank you, Sokka. (places a reassuring hand on Sokka's shoulder) It's okay, why don't you take a break? (Sokka looks rather disappointed and obliges.) Let me just clarify a few points for everyone. Today is the Day of Black Sun (Cut to a group of Earth Kingdom soldiers, Haru and Tyro starts to take interest in what he says) and I want to thank you all for your self sacrifice and your courage. (Camera slowly pans pass a group of Water Tribe warriors who are attentively listening to their leader.) They're two steps to the invasion. A naval stage and then a land stage. To gain sea access to the Fire Nation capital, (Cut to the gang who are paying attention though Sokka looks rather downcast) we have to get pass our first major obstacle here. (points to the centre of the map) The Great Gates of Azulon. Next, (flips to another map) we hit the land and we hit hard (throws his fist against the map to emphasize his point). We must fight past their battlements and secure the plaza tower (his finger points to tower on the map). Once we do that, (his fingers move up the map to a structure on the map) it's up to the royal palace. At that point, the eclipse will begin.

Boulder: (raises a hand to ask a question) Excuse me, The Boulder is confused. Isn't the point to invade during the eclipse? When the firebenders are powerless?
Hakoda: The eclipse only last 8 minutes. Not enough time for the whole invasion and the royal palace is heavily guarded by firebenders. So that's where we'll need the eclipse advantage the most. When this is finished, the Avatar would have defeated the Fire Lord. We would have control of the Fire Nation capital (Cut to a shot of Haru and Tyro with serious looks on their faces) and this war will be over!

(Everyone cheers. Cut to The Duke and Pipsqueak who are cheering wildly. Cut to the gang who join in the shouts. Sokka is still looking downcast.

Cut to Katara waterbending water from the river into her pouch. Cut to Toph putting on a wrist guard. Cut to Hakoda putting on his head gear which resembles a wolf's head. Cut to a shot Appa's armored foot stamping the ground. Cut to the camera trailing down a golden arrow which glints in the sunlight. Cut to Appa's eye. Camera zooms out to reveal Appa in his custom made armor. Appa growls. Cut to Aang shaving his head by the river and he's wearing a toga which resembles his air nomad robes. He shaves off the remaining of his hair to reveal his tattooed arrow. He stands up on cue to the dramatic music in the background, glider in hand, ready to enter battle. A koala sheep appears beside Aang and bleets while Aang pats its head.

Cut to an overhead shot of Zuko's bedroom as he stands near his bed. Cut to a shot of his hand as he removes the pin that fastens his crown in place with one hand and the crown with the other. His hair falls back to its original place. He places both objects into his belt. Zuko proceeds to remove the shoulder padding from his armor and sets it on his bed. Cut to a shot of calligraphy brushes, an ink plate and a piece of paper with 2 wooden paperweights on it. Zuko smoothens the paper with one of the wooden blocks. Cut to a shot of him staring at the paper. Cut to a close-up shot of a brush being dipped in ink. Camera slowly zooms out to reveal Zuko has begun writing and focuses on his shoulder plate armor that is on the bed.

Cut back to the port. Camera slowly moves to a hand holding a Water Tribe headgear. Cut to Sokka who is looking at it despondently. Aang flies into screen with his glider and lands beside Sokka.)

Aang: We've been looking everywhere for you. The boats are ready to leave.
Sokka: (still disappointed with himself) I messed up, Aang.
Aang: What?
Sokka: The invasion plan was my moment of truth. And I completely flopped it. I just fell apart.
Aang: Sokka, (walks up to him and places a hand on his shoulder) that speech wasn't your moment of truth. That was just public speaking and nobody's really good at that.
Sokka: My Dad is. He explained the plan perfectly and inspired everyone. Like a real leader should.
Aang: Look, your moment of truth isn't going to be in front of some map. It's going to be out there, (points to the vast ocean in front of them) on the battlefield.
Sokka: You seem so confident about everything. How do you know we're going to win?
Aang: Because I already failed the world once at Ba Sing Se. I won't let myself fail again.

(Cut to the 5 ships heading out into sea.)

Bato: (voiceover) There they are. (Cut to Bato's point of view through the telescope which reveals a statue of Fire Lord Azulon surrounded by fog) The Great Gates of Azulon.
Katara: (voiceover) I don't see any gates.

(Bato scans to the right and spots a dragon statue with a net outside its mouth. Cut to Katara and the swampbenders trying to peer through the dense fog.)

Hakoda: Katara, you and the swamp benders whip up a fog cover.
Tho: We'll sneak by that statues just like we sneaked by that fire navy blockade.

(Cut to Katara and the swampbenders jumping into position, spreading their hands apart at the same time. Cut to a shot of the boats being rapidly covered in fog. Cut to a statue of Azulon, nets can be seen coming out from the statue's sleeves)

Hakoda: Keep it up, we're almost through.

(An alarm sounds. Smoke emits from the dragon statue's snout and the net rises above the fog. The alarm stops. Someone firebends from the dragon's mouth, engulfing the net in flames. The net continues to rise out from the water and fire slowly spreads through it. Camera zooms out to show Azulon's statue with a net of fire on both sides of the statue's arms. Cut to Sokka in disbelief. Cut to commercial.)



Act II

(Scene: A statue of Azulon with nets of fire on both side of its arms. Cut to the boats stopping directly in front of the net. Cut to Aang, Katara, Hakoda and Bato who are all in shock. Their heads turn as the sound of Fire Nation jet skis pierces the silence. A handful of jet skis are seen rushing towards the boats.)

Hakoda: (ushers the invasion force) Everyone below deck. (The Gaang and a few Earth Kingdom soldiers are seen rushing to the deck below) Let's hope your invention works.

(Hakoda looks at his son confidently and both proceed to join the others below.

Cut to a shot from behind the net as the flames are still raging. The jet skis are seen stopping beside each boat.

Switch to a shot of climbing hooks being shot into a boat and Fire Nation guards land aboard in a crouching position. They proceed to search the entire ship.

Cut to 3 Fire Nation guards wielding broadswords kicking a door open, revealing an empty Water Tribe bedroom.

Cut to a fire blast blowing a door to pieces as 2 Fire Nation guards enter in an offensive position. They maintain their guard as they look around the empty room. Footsteps are heard as another guard enters to report the situation.)

Male Fire Nation Guard: No one's on board, Sir.
Female Fire Nation Guard: (lowers arms) Where'd they go?

(Cut to a shot of 5 submarines slipping by the gates undetected. Appa is seen swimming with air bubble over his head.)

Hakoda: (Cut to a shot of Sokka, Hakoda, Bato and Pipsqueak standing behind The Mechanist who is sitting in front of a control panel.) You really outdone yourself this time, son.
Toph: (Cut to Toph who is holding her head down.) Yeah. Congratulations, Sokka. (Lifts her head up. There's a look of discomfort on her face.) You managed to invent a worst way of travel than flying.

(Toph starts to gag.)

The Duke: (Takes off his helmet and offers it to Toph) Helmet?

(Toph accepts and vomits into it.)

Sokka: Well, I just came up with the idea but The Mechanist did all the work.
The Mechanist: But don't sell yourself short, my boy. It was your idea (Cut to Katara and Hue waterbending with a pulling motion) to use waterbending to make the subs sink and float. Brilliant, though your original designs were a bit difficult to decipher. (Unrolls a scroll with a picture of a whale with people inside drawn in cartoon style.) Unfortunately, there is one problem I couldn't fix. (rolls scroll and turns behind.) The subs have a limited air supply. (Cut to a shot of the invasion team swimming underwater) Before we land on the beaches, we'll need to resurface.

(Cut to a shot of Ming entering Iroh's jail cell, carrying a tray of food.)

Ming: Lunchtime, General Iroh. (whispering) And this time, I brought you an extra bowl of rice.
Iroh: Thank you, Ming. Your little gestures of kindness had made my days in prison bearable. (looks concerned) I think you should take the rest of the day off.
Ming: What? (looking confused)
Iroh: You don't look well. (grabs the bars) Maybe you should go home and rest.
Ming: No, I feel fine.
Iroh: Trust me. (Cut to a close-up of Iroh looking rather serious) It is better that you are not here this afternoon. (Ming nods and complies as she reluctantly leaves the room.)

(Cut to a shot of the submarines above the water. Cut to a shot of The Duke scooping water in his helmet, sloshing it around for a while before dumping the contents back into the sea. Cut to The Boulder and The Hippo doing some stretching and warming up exercises. Aang jumps into screen and lands on the submarine as the rest of the gang walk towards him.)

Aang: So, this is it huh?
Sokka: Are you ready for the Fire Nation to know the Avatar's alive?
Aang: I'm ready. (Sokka grasps his arm, wishing him luck. The gang and Momo gather around for a group hug.)
Toph: (Cut to a close-up of Toph smiling.) I hope you kick some serious Fire Lord butt, twinkle toes.
Hakoda: Everyone listen up. (The gang disbands and looks up at Hakoda who is addressing the entire invasion force from the submarine's entrance.) The next time we resurface, it'll be on the beaches. So stay alert and fight smart. Now break time's over, back in the subs. (Toph and Sokka are seen walking back while Aang and Katara remain behind. Both stare at each other and look away.)

(Simultaneously)

Katara: Aang, I.
Aang: Katara, I.
Aang: You go first.
Katara: We've been through so many things together and I've seen you grow up so much. You're not that little goofy kid (Cut to a shot of Aang blushing.) I found in the iceberg anymore. I guess what I'm trying to say is, I'm really proud of you.
Aang: Everything is going to be different after today, isn't it?
Katara: Yes, it is.
Aang: (uncertain) What if... what if I don't come back?
Katara: Aang, don't say that. Of course you'll... (Aang cuts off the conversation with a kiss, much to the surprise of Katara. They part and Katara blushes as she looks away sadly. Aang opens his glider and flies off as Katara watches him go.)

Sokka: (Cut to Katara looking into the sky and still blushing. The entrance to the submarine opens.) Katara, what are you doing? It's time to submerge.

Katara: (snaps out of her dazed mood) What? Right, I'm on it.

(She waterbends herself to Appa and proceeds to bend an air bubble around his head. Appa growls and the entire invasion force begins to submerge.

Cut to a shot inside Mai's house, with the Fire Nation palace in view outside the window. Zuko walks into screen with a cloak. Cut to a picture of Mai and Zuko as Zuko stares at it for a moment before looking away.)

Zuko: I'm sorry, Mai. (He walks towards Mai's bed and places a scroll on the pillow as the camera slowly zooms out.)

(Cut to a shadow of Aang and his glider sailing through the air on a grassy plain. Cut to a shot of Aang looking at his growling stomach before maneuvering the handle to release peanuts into his mouth.)

Aang: What did you know? It did come in handy. (Cut back to the shadow of him flying. Aang adds more speed and flies towards the Fire Nation capital.)

(Cut to a periscope rising above the water surface. Cut to the view inside the periscope as it spots the gate to the Fire Nation capital.)

Hakoda: Everyone in position. Earthbenders, into your tanks. (Toph and the Earth Kingdom soldiers descend a ladder to their positions.) This is going to be a rough ride.

(Cut to a shot of the submarines approaching the gate as an alarm similar to the one heard at the Great Gates of Azulon sounds. Harpoons shoot out from various battlements into the water as the submarines try to dodge them. Harpoons continuously fill the water and Appa narrowly avoids being impaled by one. Cut to a shot of Due waterbending the submarine as a harpoon pierces through the submarine, filling the ship with water. He freezes the water and loses his balance as the harpoon reels the submarine in. Cut to a shot of the submarine slowly being pulled out of the water. Katara and Appa sees the situation from underwater and begins to ascend. Appa growls as he leaves the water and Katara proceeds to cut the harpoon with waterbending, allowing the submarine to land safely back into the water as it continues on like nothing has ever happened. The submarines are seen heading towards some holes in a wall. Cut to Hakoda looking through the periscope.)

Hakoda: Ready the torpedo.

(A torpedo encased in ice is seen loaded by 2 engineers. They lock and seal the canon.)

Hakoda: Launch!

(Hue does a waterbending move and torpedos shoot out from the bottom of all the submarines, destroying the gratings on the wall. Cut to a shot above water as columns of water spray upwards upon impact. Cut to a shot of the submarines entering the holes in the wall. Cut to a silhouette of 2 remaining submarines joining the other 3 in front. Camera pans to reveal that they're near the
shore. Cut to the Earth Kingdom soldiers and Water Tribe warriors waiting in their tanks. Sokka sighs during the wait. Cut to the submarines resurfacing and heading towards the shore while numerous projectiles are hurled at the submarines. The submarines land on shore and their base retracts, revealing a team of caterpillar tanks. Cut to a shot of the tanks advancing towards the capital as projectiles continue to be thrown at the submarines. The soldiers and warriors emit battle cries and rush out to attack. Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(Scene: The invasion force is making its way to the capital city, projectiles are being thrown at them. Cut to Earth Kingdom soldiers moving their feet in a pushing motion to move the tanks. Cut to Sokka leading a team of Water Tribe warriors. All of them are carrying weapons and shields. Cut to a scene inside a battlement as it launches a projectile but misses the group. Cut to a truck loaded with rocks making its way through the battlefield, releasing 3 rocks which Toph, The Boulder and The Hippo use to earthbend towards a battlement, destroying it in the process.

Appa lands and Katara dismounts. Cut to a group of Fire Nation tanks making its way into the battlefield, firebending at their enemies at the same time. Cut to a shot of the tanks still advancing towards the capital as projectiles continue to be thrown at the submarines. Cut to Teo inside a caterpillar tank with a serious expression on his face. 2 Earth Kingdom soldiers are seen behind him in a "ready" position. Cut to a caterpillar tank crawling up a battlement as the firebenders inside try to destroy the tank with firebending to no avail. The tank proceeds(punches the air repeatedly) to crush the roof of the battlement. Another caterpillar tank is seen crushing a Fire Nation tank and moving on when the job is done.

More reinforcements are sent in and they're seen surrounding the invasion force. Cut to swampbenders stopping in their tracks as they spot incoming enemy tanks. They bend water from barrels on a truck to shield themselves from enemy fire. They proceed to waterbend the sides of the Fire Nation tank and it spins uncontrollably, causing it to crash into the sides of another Fire Nation tank.(=)

Tho: (Bending water in a circular motion.) We're a man down. Where in tarnation is Hue?

(Tho and Due unleash their attack and a Fire Nation tank hurtles into the water. A shadow is seen moving underwater and it turns out to be the swamp monster from The Swamp. It blocks a fire blast with one hand and begins to elongate its arms to grab a tank. Fire Nation soldiers are seen leaving the tanks at the last minute. Another tank firebends at the swamp monster and Fire Nation soldiers escape the tank before it gets crushed by the swamp monster's arm. Cut to a female firebender bending fire from the mouth of a tank. She and her companion escape as the swamp monster throws the tank aside.)

Due: (Due and Tho trace the path of the tank being thrown into a battlement. The battlement explodes into flames upon impact) Hey Hue, (waving) where you been?
Hue: (a hole appears in the middle of the swamp monster's body, revealing Hue's face) Communing with nature. Takes a while to collect these
lux seaweed. (He spots an incoming attack and quickly covers his face as a fire blast narrowly tries to injure him.)

(Cut to a group of Fire Nation soldiers on komodo rhinos, they begin to catapult small projectiles of fire towards Sokka and a group of Water Tribe warriors. The projectiles explode harmlessly behind the group as they continue to press forward. Cut to the komodo rhinos charging towards the group. A komodo rhino disbands from the herd and heads towards Sokka as he jumps on a komodo rhino's horn and slices a Fire Nation's soldier's spear neatly in half. Sokka kicks the soldier off the komodo rhino as he gains control of it.)

Sokka: Dad, look out!

(Cut to Hakoda blocking a fire blast with his shield. A Fire Nation soldier charges towards him with his spear as Hakoda blocks the attack with his shield. The Fire Nation soldier executes a move which relieves Hakoda of his shield. Hakoda maneuvers his own spear and relieves the Fire Nation soldier of his weapon, leaving Hakoda with 2 spears. He uses his weapons to knock down another firebending soldier. He then throws one of his spears towards 2 soldiers, knocking them down and jumps onto Sokka's komodo rhino.

Cut to a projectile destroying the truck loaded with rocks seen earlier. The driver is seen comically driving the destroyed truck. Cut to the swamp monster destroying 2 Fire Nation tanks in one swipe. A fire blast comes into screen and the swamp monster loses an arm. Cut to a group of invasion force soldiers beside a caterpillar tank. They retreat when the tank gets knocked over by an enemy projectile.)

Hakoda: (Looking at the above situation.) Sokka, we've got to take out those battlements. It's our only chance.
Sokka: (Looks up at a battlement and narrows his eyebrows) I've got an idea.

(Cut to a shot of Sokka hanging off Appa's horn as it flies through the air with Katara on Appa's head and Hakoda in the saddle. Sokka unleashes his sword from its hilt and cuts off a projectile from a battlement. Hakoda throws 2 small grenades into another battlement. Cut to Fire Nation soldiers opening the door to escape as the battlement explodes a split second later. They groan from the impact. Cut to a shot of Katara breaking a barrel via waterbending and throwing the water inside a battlement, freezing a female soldier inside as she gives a yelp of surprise. Cut to Appa landing between 2 battlements.)

Hakoda: (All 3 dismount) You two take out that battlement. I've got this one. Watch each other's backs. (He heads towards his battlement while the siblings head towards the other.)

(Cut to a Sokka's sword cutting through a metal door with Katara freezing the guards inside with waterbending. Sokka climbs the ladder destroys the projectile. The battlement is seen exploding as the siblings leave. They pause and see their father entering the battlement through the roof with his club. Sounds of swords clashing is heard and Hakoda is heard grunting in pain as an explosion is seen coming through the window.

Cut to Katara and Sokka looking shocked. Cut to Hakoda opening the door, holding his side and moaning. He staggers a few steps before collapsing.)

Katara: Dad?
Sokka: Dad!

(They run toward him and check his condition.

Cut to a portrait of Lady Ursa. Camera zooms out to reveal Zuko kneeling in front of her picture.)

Zuko: I know I made some bad choices. But today, I'm going to set things right. (He grabs his broadswords and backpack before looking at his Mother's portrait for one last time. He throws on his cloak and walks away.)

(Cut to Appa landing back on the ground. Hakoda grunts as he is being laid on the ground by Sokka. Katara bends water from her pouch and moves her hands across Hakoda's wound, healing it in the process.)

Katara: How does that feel, Dad?

Hakoda: A... a little better. (sits up) I need... to get back... to the troops. (moans in agony.)
Katara: You're hurt. Badly. You can't fight anymore.
Hakoda: Everyone's counting on me (winces from the pain) to lead this mission, Katara. I won't let them down. (tries to get up before falling back to the ground in pain.)
Sokka: Can't you heal him any faster?
Katara: I'm doing everything I can. (Cut to Sokka looking away before closing his eyes to make a decision.)
Sokka: I'll do it.
Katara: No offense Sokka but you're not exactly Mr. Healing Hands.
Sokka: No. (stands up) I'll lead the invasion force.
Katara: Don't be crazy, Sokka.
Sokka: Maybe I am a little crazy but the eclipse is about to start and we need to be up that volcano (looks at the volcano) by the time it does.
Hakoda: (lying on the ground) You can do this. I'm proud of you, son.
Katara: I still think you're crazy but I'm proud of you too.

(Looks at Sokka with an encouraging smile. He puts on his head gear and mounts Appa.)

Sokka: Yip yip.

(Appa grunts and soars.

Cut to a scene of damaged Fire Nation vehicles. Most of the Fire Nation tanks are encased in ice. The caterpillar tanks are seen leaving the mess behind and heading towards the volcano. More projectiles are hurled towards the caterpillar tanks. Appa lands and uses his head to knock back a Fire Nation tank.)

Sokka: (raising his voice) Listen up everyone, (Cut to Teo looking at Sokka inside the tank) I want the tanks in wedge formation! (his arms open upin a V-shape) Warriors and benders in the middle. (Toph and the Earth Kingdom soldiers are seen moving into action.) We're taking that tower (points at it) and headed for the royal palace!

(Cut to the caterpillar tanks moving into said formation. Sokka is right in front with Appa.)

Sokka: (grabs his sword and points toward the enemy) Charge!

(Appa ascends. Cut to an aerial view of the Fire Nation Capital. Cut to Aang opening his glider as he flies into the city. He nears a roof and closes his glider. He peeks out from a roof and looks at the empty streets.)

Aang: That's strange.

(He leaps off the roof.

Cut to Aang running towards the palace doors. Cut to the insides of the door, the corridor is in darkness. The door opens, filling the corridor with light as Aang gets into a defensive position.)

Aang: The Avatar is back!

(He looks around, surprised that no one is there to receive him.)

Aang: Hello? (looks around and walks slowly towards the inner palace doors) Anyone home?

(Cut to a lone Fire Nation soldier trying to fight the advancing caterpillar tanks. He slowly retreats as they climb up the stairs towards the capital. Cut to 2 Fire Nation soldiers doing their best to firebend at a caterpillar tank. They retreat when no damage is done. Cut to an overhead shot as a mini-truck and 2 caterpillar tanks press forward.

Cut to Sokka jumping off the mini-truck. The camera slowly trails behind as the truck loaded with barrels of explosives collides into a wall, exploding upon impact. Camera zooms out to view that the defense wall is covered in smoke. The smoke clears and the invasion force are seen charging into the capital. Fire Nation guards and tanks retreat while 3 of the Fire Nation soldiers at the front send 3 continuous blasts towards the group. The shields of the invasion force block the fire blasts.)

Tyro: (The invasion force is seen making their way in.) The Fire Nation is falling back!

(Appa lands behind Bato)

Bato: Sokka, we're on our way to victory.

(Sokka looks at the volcano.

Cut to Aang airbending a Fire Nation drapery out of the way and getting into a defensive stance as he enters a room. His face is filled with disbelief. Camera pans out to reveal an empty and dark throne room. Camera zooms in onto the empty throne. Cut to Aang's shocked face.)

Aang: No... (drops glider and kneels on the floor in shock.) No, no, (shakes head) NO! Fire Lord Ozai, (raises voice in anger) where are you?! (His voice reverberates slightly throughout the empty throne room. Camera zooms out to show the empty throne room again. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(The episode opens with a shot of the sun with the moon just beginning to overlap it. Cut to a shot of the submarines at the water, guarded by Hue and six other warriors. The camera tilts up to the plaza. Destroyed, smoking tanks are strewn about. Cut to an overhead shot of the plaza. Fire Nation tanks and soldiers are shooting fire blasts at the caterpillar tanks, which have formed a semi circle against the plaza wall. Cut to a close up of the caterpillar tanks. The sides flip open and earthbender lob stones at the firebenders. Cut to a shot of a Fire Nation soldier signaling the catapults to fire. The projectiles fly through the air as the earthbenders' stones and shockwaves destroy the catapults.

Cut to a shot of and zoom in on Sokka, Bato, and an earthbender examining a map on the ground from behind the tanks. Behind them, Toph shoots a rock through the side of the tank just before a fireball collides with into the tank. Sokka winces at the loud explosion. Sokka looks up and sees Katara helping Hakoda through the plaza's large doorways. He is holding his side, still wounded.)

Sokka: Dad! You're on your feet again.

(Sokka and Toph run towards Katara and Hakoda. Katara lets Hakoda sit down.)

Hakoda: Thanks to your sister. I'm in no shape to fight but maybe there is someway I could help.
Sokka: Everything's going smoothly and the eclipse hasn't even kicked in yet.
Hakoda: Let's hope our luck holds out. Katara, you seem distracted. Is something wrong?

(Katara takes a few steps forward and looks out in the distance.)

Katara: Yeah... Is that... is that Aang?
Sokka: What?

(Aang can be seen gliding towards them, dodging the numerous fireballs. He lands in front of his friends.)

Sokka: Please tell you're here because the Fire Lord turned out to be a big wimp and you didn't even need the eclipse to take him down?
Aang: He wasn't home. No one was. The entire palace city is abandoned.

(Cut to a close up of Sokka's profile. The camera rotates around to his front as he comes to a realization.)

Sokka: They knew.
Aang: It's over. The Fire Lord is probably long gone. Far away on some remote island where he'll be safe during the eclipse.
Sokka: No. My instincts tell me he wouldn't go too far. He would have a secret bunker. Somewhere he could go so it'll be safe during a siege but still be close enough to lead his nation.
Toph: If it's an underground secret bunker we're looking for, I'm just the girl to find it.

(Sokka pulls out a small device resembling a pocket watch. It ticks, and there is a dial and notches on one section of it.)

Sokka: The Mechanist gave me this timing device. It looks like we've got about 10 minutes until the full eclipse. 10 minutes to find the Fire Lord.
Aang: We can still do this. We can still win the day.
Katara: Wait. If they knew we were coming, it could all be a trap. Maybe we should use the time we have left to make sure all of us get out of here safely.
Hakoda: Everyone who's here today came prepared to risk everything for this mission. They know what's at stake. If there's still a chance and there's still hope, I think they would want Aang to go for it.
Sokka: What do you think? You're the one who has to face the Fire Lord. Whatever you decide, I'm with you.

(Aang stands up and faces toward the battlefield.)

Aang: I've got to try.

(The camera zooms out and the scene fades to a shot of Appa flying towards the top of the volcano where the Fire Nation capital is. He lands on the side, and Aang, Sokka, and Toph jump off him.)

Aang: Do you feel anything down there?
Toph: (her hand to the ground) Yep. There are natural tunnels criss-crossing through the inside of the volcano.
Sokka: Anything else? Is there a structure somewhere?
Toph: (she extends her hands to each side before plunging them into the ground, gripping the earth with her fingers) There's something big, dense, and made of metal deep in the heart of the volcano.
Sokka: Sounds like a secret bunker to me.

(Toph thrusts her hands forward, bending a hole into the side of the volcano. Momo chirps and curiously sticks his head out from behind the headpiece on Appa's armor.)

Aang: Stay safe. We'll be back soon.

(Toph, Sokka, and Aang enter though the hole into a dark tunnel. Toph kneels down and feels the ground before running down one side of the tunnel. Sokka and Aang quickly follow.)

Toph: This way! That one's a dead end.
Sokka: What would we do without you?
Toph: Perish and burn in hot magma.

(They crawl past a small stream of lava and Sokka flinches away from it.)

Sokka: Yeah, pretty much.

(The three of them come to a cavern filled with active lava vents all over the floor.)

Toph: The tunnel continues on the other side and it leads right to the bunker.
Sokka: We'll have to be fast but careful.

(Sokka attempts to run across, but is immediately stopped by one of the vents erupting. He yells in surprise and shields himself as Aang swings his staff at it, bending a gust of wind and cooling down the lava.)

Aang: How was that careful?
Sokka: I was wrong. We need to be fast, careful and lucky.

(Toph, Aang, and Sokka run across the cavern, carefully dodging the steam and lava coming from the vents. Cut to a shot of the three from the front, covered in a red glow. They all stop and look dismayed. The camera quickly zooms out to reveal them standing on a small cliff above a large river of lava.)

Sokka: There's no floor! It's just a river of lava.

(Aang spins his staff and extends the glider wings.)

Aang: Climb aboard and hold on tight.

(Cut to a shot of Sokka and Toph holding on to the top of Aang's glider as he glides through the lava tunnel, screaming with fright. Aang banks left and right, avoiding a stone column and a lava explosion. They all make it to the other side and land easily before continuing on foot. Cut to an overhead shot of the cavern floor. The camera zooms out and tilts up to show Aang, Toph, and Sokka running up to a large metal bunker built against the cavern wall.)

Sokka: That's some door!

(Toph walks up to the door, places her ear against it, and knocks on it, producing a metallic thud.)

Toph: Not a problem.

(Toph takes a step back before bashing her elbows into the door, fracturing and denting it. She takes another step back, kisses her middle and index fingers, and forcefully stabs them through the middle of the door. Toph kicks a hole through the metal. Cut to a shot of the other side of the door as Toph's leg bursts through. She widens the opening and steps through. With sound effect added, Toph points in a direction and takes off, followed by Aang and Sokka.)

Sokka: I am so glad we added you to the group.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the Fire Nation capital. The camera tilts down to the invasion force making their way up the path towards the top. Cut to an overhead shot of three caterpillar tanks and a legion of soldiers moving up the path while fireballs are flung at them. Cut to a shot of a Fire Nation battlement from below as a firebender throws fireballs from it. The camera zooms out to show the fireball hitting the metal shields that the earthbenders are carrying over their heads. The Boulder and the Hippo run towards the cliffside under the battlement, slap their hands against it, and earthbend an avalanche, demolishing the battlement. The same is done to another battlement. Cut to a shot of one of the Fire Nation commanding officers. The camera rotates around him as he turns around and looks at the sky. The moon is slowly starting to move over the sun.)

Fire Nation Fighter #1: Retreat! Everyone move to secondary defensive position! Retreat!

(The battlement behind him tips over and falls over. Three firebenders retreat as three caterpillar tanks draw close to them. Cut to a shot of Bato hanging on the back of one of the tanks, addressing the other soldiers.)

Bato: The eclipse is only minutes away. We should be able to make it up the hill by the time it starts and secure the entire palace by the time it's finished!

(The soldiers all give a hearty battle cry. Cut to Katara holding Hakoda over her shoulder.)

Katara: We can wait here if you want.
Hakoda: No. I want to press forward with the others.

(Katara and Hakoda continue forward. Cut to a shot of the rafters inside the Fire Nation bunker. The camera tilts down to War Minister Qin walking down a tunnel. The camera zooms out to show Aang, Sokka, and Toph running down a tunnel on the other side that merges with the first one. Qin whistles a tune just as he comes to the end of the wall and the three kids run past him. He gasps in shock, alerting the three to his presence. The turn around and brandish their weapons at him, Toph stomping the ground and popping a rocking into the air. Qin presses his back against the wall and raises his hands in surrender.)

War Minister Qin: The Fire Lord's chamber is that way down the hall to the left and up the stairs. You can't miss it.

(Aang, Sokka, and Toph all step in closer to him. Cut to a shot from just above Qin's head of Aang and Sokka glaring up at him.)

Aang: (suddenly smiles cheerfully) Thanks.

(They leave Qin, Sokka giving him one last dirty look. Once their gone, Qin breathes a sigh of relief, looks left and right to make sure no one saw anything, composes himself and continues walking and whistling as if nothing happened. Cut to a shot of the tunnel floor's level as Aang, Sokka, and Toph run past. Sokka pulls out the Mechanist's device and checks their time.)

Sokka: Only 30 seconds until the total eclipse.

(Cut to a shot of the three coming to another large door with a flame symbol on the front and at the top. Aang takes a deep breath and closes his eyes. Cut to a close up of Aang.)

Aang: I'm ready. I'm ready to face the Fire Lord.

(The camera zooms out just as Aang spins his staff up and forward. Cut to a shot of the other side of the door as it is blown off its hinges by Aang's blast of air. The camera zooms way out to show that the room is one large hall supported by thick metal beams on both sides, lit by torchlight. There is a single throne at the end of the hall. Cut to a shot from the front of the hall as Aang, Sokka, and Toph run inside. Azula is lounging on the throne.)

Azula: So, you are alive after all.

(Cut to a shot of Aang in utter, speechless shock. Zoom out to show all three of them. Sokka is as shocked as Aang. Cut to a shot of the bottom of the throne and tilt up towards Azula.)

Azula: I had a hunch that you survived. It doesn't matter, I've known about the invasion for months.

(Cut to a profile shot of Aang, still shocked, before the scene cuts to a shot of Zuko from behind, standing in front of a much smaller door within the tunnels. He has his broadswords slung on his back. Cut to a shot of him from a low angle.)

Zuko: I'm ready to face you.

(Cut to a shot of the other side of the door and zoom out as Zuko slides it open. There are elite guards with spears standing at the front. Cut to a shot of Fire Lord Ozai. He is just about to take a sip from a steaming cup of tea when he notices Zuko.)

Fire Lord Ozai: Prince Zuko, what are you doing here?

(Cut to a shot from behind Ozai and zoom out. Zuko walks towards the line of guards. Cut to commercial.)



Act II

(The show returns with a shot of the moon passing over the sun, covering almost all of it. Cut to a far, overhead shot of the invasion force on the side of the volcano. The camera shifts over to focus of the capital in the crater. Shift to a close shot of water tribe warriors marching up the volcano. A tank passes by on the other side. The Mechanist walks on screen and looks back.)

The Mechanist: The eclipse is starting. Put on your eclipse glasses.

(The Mechanist takes off his monocle and places a visor with thin slits over his eyes. The warriors stop marching for a moment and do the same before continuing on. Cut to a shot of Katara and Hakoda with their eclipse glasses on as they look towards the sun. Cut to a shot of the eclipse as the moon completely blacks out the sun. The scene cuts to Zuko standing in front of Ozai and his guards.)

Fire Lord Ozai: Why are you here?
Zuko: I'm here to tell the truth.
Fire Lord Ozai: Telling the truth during the middle of an eclipse. This should be interesting.

(Ozai waves his hand and his guards leave through doors on both sides of the chamber.)

Zuko: First of all, in Ba Sing Se, it was Azula who took down the Avatar, not me.
Fire Lord Ozai: Why would she lie to me about that?
Zuko: Because the Avatar is not dead. He survived.
Fire Lord Ozai: (alarmed) What?!
Zuko: In fact, he probably is leading this invasion. He could be on us right now.
Fire Lord Ozai: (stands up and points, furious) Get out! Get out of my sight right now if you know what's good for you.
Zuko: That's another thing. I'm not taking orders from you anymore.
Fire Lord Ozai: (seething with rage) You will obey me or this defiant breathe will be your last!

(Ozai begins to walk towards Zuko, until Zuko unsheathes his broadswords and brandishes them at him.)

Zuko: Think again! I am going to speak my mind and you are going to listen.

(Cut to a close up of Ozai as he sits back down before the scene cuts to a shot of Aang, Toph, and Sokka, ready to fight.)

Aang: Where is he? Where is the Fire Lord?
Azula: (sarcastically) Hm, you mean I'm not good enough for you? You're hurting my feelings.
Sokka: (brandishes his sword) Stop wasting our time and give us the information. You're powerless right now so you're in no position to refuse.
Toph: And stick to the truth. I'll be able to tell if you're lying.
Azula: Are you sure? I'm a pretty good liar. (her face becomes completely expressionless) I am a 400 foot tall purple platypus bear with pink horns and silver wings.
Toph: (after a brief pause) Okay you're good, I admit it. (bends the earth underneath Azula so that it encases her is a conical shape) But you really ought to consider telling the truth anyway.

(Azula gives a small smirk. The camera zooms out from her as the stone trap shatters. Sokka, Aang, and Toph are all shocked. Azula keeps smirking as she brushes some rubble off her shoulder.)

Azula: When I left Ba Sing Se, I brought home some souvenirs. (two Dai Li agents drop from the ceiling and land in front of her) Dai Li agents.

(Aang swings his staff at them, throwing out a blast of wind. The Dai Li both bend a stone wall in front and completely nullify the attack. The scene cuts to the invasion force making its way to the edge of the crater. The camera tilts up towards the Fire Nation royal palace. Cut to a shot of Bato standing at the edge. Warriors and two tanks make their way past him and over the edge.)

Bato: Surround the periphery! We have to secure the palace by the time the eclipse is over. Otherwise, we'll be in for the fight of our lives.

(Bato makes his way down with the rest of them. The tanks and soldiers reach the edge of the capital and make their way in. Cut to a shot of a group of firebenders lining themselves up in one of the alleys. Haru, Tyro, and a group of earthbenders come to face them.)

Tyro: Stop! Surrender peacefully and we won't harm you.
Fire Nation Fighter #2: We'll never surrender. (he steps forward, makes flailing movements with his arms, dashes forward and thrusts his palm forward as if to shoot a fire ball, but all that is produced is a pathetic fizzle)Er okay, we surrender.

(He and the other firebenders bow down and present their hands in surrender. Shift to Katara and Hakoda climbing up to the edge of the crater, looking down at the Fire Nation capital as the soldiers and tanks head to the palace.)

Hakoda: There it is. The Fire Nation royal palace. We've come so far.
Katara: It's not over yet.

(Both begin to head down. The scene cuts to Zuko and Ozai in the bunker.)

Zuko: For so long, all I wanted was you to love me, to accept me. I thought it was my honor that I wanted but really, I was just trying to please you. You, my father, who banished me just for talking out of turn. (points a sword at Ozai) My father, who challenged me; a 13-year-old boy to an Agni Kai. How can you possibly justify a duel with a child?
Fire Lord Ozai: It was to teach you respect.
Zuko: It was cruel! And it was wrong.
Fire Lord Ozai: Then you have learned nothing.
Zuko: No, I've learnt everything! And I had to learn it on my own. Growing up, we were taught that the Fire Nation was the greatest civilization in history and somehow, the war was our way of sharing our greatness with the rest of the world. What an amazing lie that was. The people of the world are terrified by the Fire Nation! They don't see our greatness, they hate us! And we deserve it. We've created an era of fear in the world. And if we don't want the world to destroy itself, we need to replace it with an era of peace and kindness.
Fire Lord Ozai: (laughs mocking) Your Uncle has gotten to you, hasn't he?
Zuko: (closes his eyes for a second) Yes. He has.

(Zuko smiles.

Ozai can only frown in disapproval. The scene cuts to a stone wall just as it explodes and reveals Aang, Sokka, and Toph running towards the camera. A stone structure erupts from the floor where Aang is standing, but he jumps away from it and jumps off one of the metal beams and flips forward. The two Dai Li agents pull two slabs from the ground and fling them at Aang, but he deflects them with two kicks. The camera zooms out just as Toph bursts through the stone behind Aang, creating a hole in it. She lands between the agents and bends two diagonal pillars of stone up from beneath them as she lands, pushing them towards the walls. The agents both land of the walls feet first and both bend a pillar of stone down at Toph, who blocks the attacks by bending two stone walls up from the floor.

Toph thrusts her hands forwards and bends a stream of earth at Azula. Cut to a shot of the stream from the side as it makes contact with Azula. The scene goes into slow motion and cuts to a shot of Azula's foot as the stream of earth pushes her up into the air. The scene comes back to normal speed to a shot of Azula back flipping off the attack and flying back towards the throne. Cut to a close up of Azula smirking as she lands.

Cut to Aang as he runs forward. Cut to a shot from behind one of the Dai Li's back as he watches Aang and runs to the side. Cut to a close up of Aang from the side as he's running. He turns and stops when he hears a loud, grinding sound. Cut to a shot of the Dai Li agent sliding over the side of the wall and past Aang. He flings himself off the wall and in front of Aang with a pillar of earth, putting himself in front of Azula. The agent sinks into the floor as he lands and bends a large, diagonal wall of stone of from the floor. Aang jumps high into the air, flips forward, and bursts through the wall feet first. Cut to a shot from the side as Aang lands behind the Dai Li agent, popping him into the air as he lands with one small pillar of stone and knocking him away with a larger one, knocking the agent out of the fight. Aang spins his staff above his head, letting go of it as he turns forward, winds up, and shoots a powerful blast of air with one hand at Azula.

Cut to a closer shot of Azula as she grabs on to the arms of the throne and cartwheels away just before the throne is completely destroyed by the air blast. Aang dashes to where Azula was and swings his staff as her, bending out a blade of air. Cut to a shot of Azula running between two metal beams. She jumps over the blade of air and at the beam, then flips off that one back towards the beam behind her. Cut to a close up of Azula landing on the side of the beam just before spring off it as another blade of air barely misses her.

Cut to a shot of Azula barrel rolling and doing the splits as she lands on the ground. There is a brief close up of Azula just before she runs off, Aang chasing after. Cut to an overhead shot of Azula running behind the metal beams. She jumps onto and jumps off a beam just as Aang sends another blade of air at her. Azula continues running forward and hopping from the wall to the beams and up to one of the stone beams the Dai Li agents had attacked Toph with. Aang does a small pole vault with his staff and kicks a blast of air at Azula, but misses. Cut to a shot of Azula sliding down the stone beam. She jumps off the diagonal wall Toph had created to block the attack earlier and lands on the other one before flipping off of it and landing on the floor.

Cut to a close up of Azula as she turns and faces Aang. Aang and Toph run at her. Azula turns and runs towards the large stone wall. Cut to a shot of the other Dai Li agent sliding down the stone beam towards the floor and Azula. The agents lands behind her and then bends a pillar up from beneath her, sending Azula into the air towards the hole in the wall that Toph had made. Cut to a close up of the hole as Sokka climbs up into it. Cut to a shot from behind Sokka as Azula flies towards him. The scene goes into slow motion and cut to a close up of Azula passing just inches above Sokka's face as he ducks down. She smirks down at him while he looks back at her fearfully.

The scene comes back to full speed as Azula lands on the other side of the wall and runs towards the exit. Cut to a shot of Sokka as he tries to climb back down. He stops and ducks timidly as the Dai Li agent, Toph, and Aang jump over him and through the hole, one at a time. Sokka drops down and follows after. Cut to a close up of Toph from the side as she chases after Azula. Aang catches up to her from the side.)

Aang: I can't pin her down. She's too quick.

(Cut to a shot from the front of Aang, Toph, and Sokka running forward. Toph strafes to the side and off screen. Cut to a shot from inside the tunnels of Azula running out the doors and towards the camera. The Dai Li agent slides out of the room and blocks the entrance with a large stone. The Dai Li agent slides over the ground and after Azula just as Aang bursts through the stone and continues chasing them. Cut to a shot from the ground level of Azula and the agent running away from the camera. The Dai Li agent is knocked to the side by a
stone pillar ejecting out of the side of the wall. A hole opens in the side of
the wall and Toph flies out of it. Cut to a shot of the agent hitting the inside of the groove of one of the steel beams supporting the tunnel. He tries to attack, but Toph smashes his stone gloves into dust before grabbing both sides of the beam's grooves and pulling them in, trapping the agent.

Cut to a close up of Toph admiring her work. Aang runs past her and she follows. Cut to a shot of Aang and Toph running down the tunnel and past the camera. Sokka catches up to them.)

Sokka: Wait! Aang, Toph, stop attacking. (Aang, Toph, and Azula all stop running) Don't you see what she's doing? She's just playing with us. She's not even trying to win this fight!
Azula: (sarcastically) Not true, I'm giving it my all.
Toph: You're trying to keep us here and waste all our time!
Azula: Um, right. I think your friend just said that genius. And since you can't see, I should tell you I'm rolling my eyes.
Toph: (angry)I 'll roll your whole head!
Sokka: She's just baiting you again.
Aang: Okay, so what do we do? Just ignore her?
Sokka: We don't have a choice. We just have to get out of here and find the Fire Lord on our own somehow.

(Aang, Sokka, and Toph turn and walk away from Azula.)

Azula: It's a trap. Don't say I didn't warn you.

(Aang and Toph stop and turn to Azula for a moment, but Sokka keeps walking, waving a hand back at her.)

Sokka: (spreading one arm wide over his head in a gesture of dismissal) Ignore!
Azula: (in a slightly bored tone) So, Sokka's your name right My favorite prisoner used to mention you all the time. (Sokka stops and turns around) She was convinced that you were going to come rescue her. Of course, you never came and she gave up on you.

(The camera zooms in on Sokka. Tears fill his eyes and he gives a furious cry of anger as he rushes at Azula. Cut to a close up of Azula as she smirks smugly.)

Azula: (under her breath, dripping with malice) Come and get it...

(Cut to a shot of Azula's hand as she slips a deadly, ornate blade from her sleeve. Cut to a shot of Toph as she senses the deception. The camera zooms out as she raises her knee, which raises a stone into the air, and shoots it forward with a thrust of her hands. Cut to a shot of Azula's wrist being pinned against the wall by the stone, the blade dropping from her hand. Azula grunts in pain as she hits the wall. Sokka grabs Azula's shoulder, pushes her up again the wall, and glares into her eyes.)

Sokka: Where is Suki?!

(The scene shifts to a far shot of Zuko and Ozai from the side.)

Zuko: After I leave here today, I'm going to free Uncle Iroh from his prison and I'm going to beg for his forgiveness. He is the one who has been a real father to me.
Fire Lord Ozai: (chuckles sarcastically) That's just beautiful. Maybe he can pass down to you the ways of tea and failure.
Zuko: But I've come to an even more important decision. (pauses I'm going to join the Avatar. And I'm going to help him defeat you.
Fire Lord Ozai: (grinning slyly) Really? Since you're a full blown traitor now and you want me gone, why wait? I'm powerless, you've got your
swords, why don't you just do it now?
Zuko: Because I know my own destiny. Taking you down is the Avatar's destiny. (sheathes his swords) Goodbye.

(Cut to a close up of the right side of Zuko's face as he walks away. Ozai can be seen behind him.)

Fire Lord Ozai: (standing) Coward! You think you're brave enough to face me but you'll only do it during an eclipse. If you have any real courage, you'll stick around until the Sun comes out. Don't you want to know what happened to your Mother?

(Cut to a shot from behind Zuko as he stops in front of the doors and turns around. Cut to a close up of Ozai as he grins venomously. Cut to a shot of the tallest tower of the Fire Nation palace, the eclipse in the sky, before cutting to commercial.)



Act III

(The episode returns with a close up of the lower edge of the eclipse. Cut to a shot from behind Zuko as he stands before Ozai.)

Zuko: What happened that night?
Fire Lord Ozai: My father, Fire Lord Azulon, had commanded me to do the unthinkable to you, my own son. And I was going to do it. Your Mother had found out and swore she would protect you at any cost. She knew I wanted the throne and she proposed a plan. A plan in which I would become Fire Lord and your life would be spared.

(There is a close up of Zuko's eyes. Cut to a close up of Sokka.)

Sokka: (angry) Where's Suki?! Answer me!

(Cut to a shot from the side of Sokka glaring at Azula, her arms pinned above her head against the wall.)

Aang: (grabbing Sokka's shoulder) Sokka, she won't talk.
Sokka: (hesitates, then turns back to Azula) Where are you keeping her?!

(Cut to a close up of Azula and zoom in as she smirks silently. Fade to a shot of Ozai at exactly the same angle.)

Fire Lord Ozai: Your Mother did vicious, treasonous things that night. She knew the consequences and accepted them. For her treason, she was banished.
Zuko: (a tear streams from his eye) So she's alive.
Fire Lord Ozai: Perhaps. Now I realize that banishment is far too merciful a penalty for treason. Your penalty will be far steeper.

(Fade to the shot of the edge of the eclipse. The moon passes over and the rays of the sun shine through. Cut to a close up of Ozai's eye quickly opening. Cut to a shot of Ozai stepping forward and swinging his arms out, creating two arcs of electricity from the tips of his fingers. He thrusts his fingers forward and fires an incredible bolt of lightning at Zuko. Cut to a shot from the side as Zuko catches the lightning with the tips of his fingers. Zuko slides backward from the force of the attack, the lightning surrounding his body and making his hair stand on end. Zuko sinks his body down and pulls his arms in as the electricity runs through his body, then thrusts his other hand forward, redirecting the lightning in Ozai's direction. Cut to a shot from the side as the bolt strikes the ground where Ozai is standing, creating an explosion that knocks Ozai against the wall and the tapestry behind him. Cut to a close up of Ozai as he straightens up, his hair falling over his face. The camera zooms out as the tapestry falls down and a fire caused by the explosion burns in front of Ozai. Cut to a shot from behind Ozai to reveal that Zuko has fled.

Cut to a close up of Azula.)

Azula: Oh. Sounds like the firebending's back on.

(The camera quickly zooms out as Azula kicks her leg upward and creates an arc of blue fire, making Sokka jump back in surprise. She thrusts he foot forward and shoots a fireball at Sokka. He is saved from the attack by Toph, who jumps in and pushes him out of the way. Azula flips up and places her feet on the wall. Cut to a close up of Azula straining herself to break her arms free. She grins as the rock trapping her there explodes in a blue flame. She springs off the wall towards Aang and flips forward. Aang jumps out of the way as Azula lands with a fiery heel drop where he was standing. Aang, Sokka, and Toph all ready themselves for another attack. Cut to a shot of Azula standing up and turning to them.)

Azula: Dad's all the way at the end of the hall and down the secret stairway on the left. I'm sure he'll be more than happy to see you now.

(Azula quickly runs away down the tunnel.)

Sokka: I fell for it! I used up all our time.
Toph: It's not your fault, Sokka. Azula was ready for us. She had every move planned out.
Sokka: (hopeless) And now it's too late.
Aang: Maybe it's not too late. The eclipse is over but I can face the Fire Lord anyway.
Sokka: No. I don't think that's a good idea.
Aang: But I'm ready! I came here with a job to do and everyone's counting on me.
Toph: The Fire Lord knew we were coming this time. We thought we had surprise on our side but we didn't. It just wasn't our day. What we need to do now is go help our friends.
Aang: I guess you guys are right.
Sokka: (putting a hand on Aang's shoulder) You'll have another chance. I know you will.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the palace surrounded by the tanks and warriors. Cut to a shot of Katara laying Hakoda against one of the tanks. They both take off their eclipse glasses.)

Bato: (off screen) What should we do, Hakoda? Shouldn't something have happened by now?
Hakoda: I don't know. But now that the eclipse is over I expect we're going to see some firebenders any minute.

(Cut to a shot of Bato as he suddenly looks up in shock. The camera zooms out to show Katara turning to look in the same direction. Cut to a shot of the palace and zoom out as five Fire Nation war balloons ascend into the air. Cut to a closer shot of the balloons from the side, showing firebenders powering them.)

The Mechanist: (off screen) My own invention. Oh this is terrible!

(Teo silently places a consoling hand on his father's shoulder. Cut to a shot of one of the war balloons. Behind it ascends an enormous zeppelin. Cut to a shot from ground level as everyone stares up at the five war balloons along with five huge zeppelins decorated with dragon motifs. Cut to a shot of Bato, Katara, and Hakoda. Katara turns and points into the sky.)

Katara: They're back!

(Katara runs forward. Cut to a shot of Appa, carrying Aang, Sokka, and Toph, flying towards the camera. Cut to a shot from behind Aang's head as he looks up at the war balloons. Cut to a close of Aang from the front, his expression worried. Cut to a panning right shot of the side of one of the zeppelins. Cut to a shot of Appa landing and Katara running up to him. Cut to a shot of Aang looking down at Katara uneasily. The camera turns to Sokka, Toph, and Momo in Appa's saddle.)

Sokka: It was all a trap. Azula knew we were coming and she's plotted out every move. (he and Toph jump down from Appa)We just got to get to the beach as fast as we can. If we can make it to the submarines, maybe we can get away safely.
Aang: (off screen) They've got air power, but so do I! (opens his glider) I'm going to do what I can to slow them down.

(Aang throws his glider into the air. He catches onto it and flies into the air as it loops back to him. Appa growls. Katara climbs on him.)

Katara: Appa, you and I can help too.

(Cut to Aang flying towards the zeppelins in the distance, Appa and Katara follow behind. Cut to Sokka, Toph, Hakoda, and Bato.)

Sokka: Everyone, let's get back to the subs!

(They all turn and follow Sokka. Cut to a shot from the front of Aang gliding, Appa and Katara behind him. The camera follows him as he glides past the camera and towards the small war balloons. Cut to a shot of a firebender shooting two fireballs at Aang, who banks and rolls to avoid the attack. He then throws his glider forward, closes it, grabs the end of it, and pierces straight through the fabric of the balloon. Air leaks from the war balloon and it goes down as Aang glides on towards the zeppelins. Cut to a shot of Katara in Appa's saddle from behind her. The camera focuses in on an approaching war balloon. Katara stands up and bends the water out from her flasks. With a swift rotation of her arms and body, Katara makes a clean, horizontal cut through the balloon. She and Appa fly past the camera, and after a brief moment, the top of the war balloon flutters away and the bottom part drops.

Cut to a shot of Appa, Katara, and Aang flying up towards the zeppelins. The camera tilts upward as countless fireballs are shot of them. Cut to a shot of Aang, Appa, and Katara flying towards the camera. A few fireballs hit Appa and he growls in discomfort, but his armor protects him. Appa tries to fly in close, but is driven back by the force of the fire blasts. Cut to a shot from behind of firebenders standing on small platforms under the body of a zeppelin. They are in harnesses attached to supports above them. The shoot fire blasts at Appa as he flies right past them. Cut to a shot of Katara creating a shield of water to block the oncoming fireballs. Aang glides on screen in the background.)

Katara: We can't keep them all back. They're too many of them!
Aang: Let's join the others.

(Aang barely dodges another fireball. Cut to a shot of Aang and Appa flying over the capital and back towards the ocean. The scene shifts to a shot of the top of the Fire Nation prison. The camera tilts down to the entrance. There are multiple craters in the stone wall and stairs. Zuko runs in from behind the camera and towards the door. Cut to a shot inside the prison of a guard lying on the floor. He looks up, and then winces as Zuko runs past him. Zuko runs down the hall and towards a doorway. Cut to a shot looking through the doorway as Zuko runs to it.)

Zuko: Uncle!

(Cut to a shot from behind Zuko and zoom in on the interior of the cell. There is a huge hole in the cage, and the surrounding bars are bents outward. Warden Poon is lying on the floor, dazed. Zuko runs in and grabs Poon by the collar.)

Zuko: Where is my Uncle?
Warden Poon: (shocked and awed) He's gone. He busted himself out. I... I've never seen anything like it! He was like a one man army!

(Zuko lets go of Poon and exits. Cut to Sokka running down the slope towards the plaza, the others following behind. He stops and looks up. The camera pans up to the zeppelins high in the air, slowing making their way towards them. Cut to a shot of the bottom of one of the zeppelins. Bomb bay doors open up. Cut to Sokka as Aang, Appa, and Katara land behind him.)

Sokka: Try and find cover! I think we're about to see some bombs.

(Everyone huddles together as Toph bends a large slab of stone above them. Cut to a shot looking up at the zeppelins as large red, cylinder shaped bombs drop from them. Cut to a shot from the inside of the bomb bay looking down as the bombs hit the ground and explode. Cut to a shot of the bombs impacting the stone shields protecting the invasion forces. The camera tilts down to the group Toph is protecting. The slab cracks and begins to fall, but Toph bends two stone supports up from the ground to keep it standing. Cut to a shot of the
caterpillar tanks quickly making their way down the slope as bombs go off all around them. Cut to the interior of one of the tanks as The Boulder, The Hippo,
and other earthbenders are knocked off balance by the explosions. Cut to a shot above the zeppelins as they pass over, ceasing the raid. Cut to a shot of Sokka, Aang, Toph, and Katara coming out from under the stone and looking up at the zeppelins as they fly towards the beach.)

Katara: Why aren't they turning around to attack us again?
Aang: They're headed for the beach. They're going to destroy the submarines!
Sokka: How are we all going to escape?
Hakoda: We're not.
Sokka: Then our only choice is to stand and fight. We have the Avatar, we could still win!
Hakoda: Yes, with the Avatar we could still win on another day. You kids have to leave. You have to escape on Appa together.
Katara: What? We can't leave you behind. We won't leave anyone behind.
Hakoda: You're our only chance in a long run. You and Sokka have to go with Aang somewhere safe. It's the only way to keep hope alive.
Bato: The youngest of our group should go with you. The adults will stay behind and surrender. We'll be prisoners but we'll all survive this battle.
Tyro: I've got some experience with the Fire Nation prisons. It's not going to be easy but we'll get by.
Sokka: They're at the beach already!

(Cut to a shot of the plaza ground. The camera tilts up to the submarines and the swamp benders as the shadow of a zeppelin passes over. Cut to a shot from ground level looking up at the seaweed creature created by Hue. The zeppelins fly overhead and begin to drop more bombs. Due and Tho bend water from the ocean, swinging their arms in windmill motions to send the water into the air and intercept the bombs. The bombs explode in midair. Hue grabs two oncoming bombs with his seaweed arms. He tosses one away, but the other explodes, destroying the arm of the seaweed creature. Another bomb lodges itself inside the body of the creature and explodes, destroying it. The seaweed falls on top of Due and Tho. Hue, Due, and Tho stick their heads out from the pile of steaming seaweed. Cut to a shot from the side of the bombs falling on the submarines. One by one they explode and are destroyed. A bomb falls in front of the camera and explodes. The smoke clears and we see a shot of the destroyed submarines from above. The camera pans left as they burn away. Cut to Aang and his friends as the look on with despair. The camera pans to Sokka, who shuts his eyes and grudgingly accepts the turn of events.

Cut to a shot of Appa's saddle. Toph and The Mechanist, who is carrying Teo, rise up to Appa's back on a platform of stone that Toph is bending. Toph hops in the saddle and The Mechanist places Teo down in it, hugging him in goodbye.)

The Mechanist: Bye, son.
Teo: (sadly) Bye, Dad. I'm really proud of you.

(Toph lowers The Mechanist back to the ground. He takes one last look at Teo. Cut to a shot of The Duke trying to climb onto Appa's head. Pipsqueak helps him up.)

The Duke: I'll miss you, Pipsqueak.
Pipsqueak: Take care, The Duke.

(Cut to Haru and Tyro hugging each other goodbye. The duke can be seen climbing up Appa in the background.)

Haru: I'll be back for you Dad.
Tyro: If we don't escape on our own first.

(Haru puts his fist into his hand and bows respectfully to his father. Cut to Sokka, Hakoda, and Katara.)

Hakoda: We lost today but we've never been this close. We tasted victory and that counts for something.
Katara: We'll miss you Dad.

(Katara, Sokka, and Hakoda have one last group hug.)

Sokka: Bye Dad. We won't be apart for too long this time. I promise.

(Cut to a shot of Aang from behind. He's on his knees on top of Appa's head, with Momo sitting next to him. Katara walks up to him and places a hand on his shoulder. Cut to a close up of Aang to show him crying. He glances at Katara, who smiles at him. He looks away and wipes his eyes before standing up and addressing the rest of the invasion force.)

Aang: Thank you all for being so brave and so strong. I'm going to make this up to you.

(Katara jumps into the saddle and Aang sits down. Momo climbs on to Aang's shoulder and Appa takes off. Cut to a shot of Aang's back as Appa flies away from the camera and into the distance. Katara and Sokka both look back. Cut to an overhead shot of the adults and zoom out as they stare upward. Cut to a shot of Appa in the distance. One of the zeppelins slowly flies on screen between Appa and the camera. Cut to a shot of the inside of the zeppelins gondola. The captain and Azula watch Appa fly away through a window.)

Captain: Should we follow them, Princess?
Azula: No. They're too fast. It doesn't matter, they'll be back.

(The camera zooms in on Azula before cutting to a shot of Aang and the other on Appa from the front. They look back at the zeppelin as they fly away. Aang turns back to the front.)

Aang: I know just the place for us to go where we'll be safe for a while. The Western Air Temple.

(Appa flies forward. Cut to a shot of Appa flying far into the distant clouds. A single Fire Nation war balloon flies on screen from below, following them. Cut to a shot of Zuko in the balloon's basket, holding on to the ropes and staring off at Appa. The camera zooms in on him. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence, including clips from "The Day of Black Sun, Part 2: The Eclipse".]



Act I

(The episode opens up to an overhead shot of Appa still in his armor and the rest of the group walking slowly on a rocky and barren land with the Sun blazing above their heads. Cut to a frontal shot of Toph with her head down, trudging along with Haru and Sokka walking behind her with their eyes closed.

Cut to Aang walking tiredly with Momo resting on his head with a similar expression. Cut to a frontal shot of Teo wheeling his wheelchair with The Duke following behind him. Both of them are hanging their heads down dejectedly. Switch to a sideview shot of Katara walking beside her brother with the same expression as the rest of the group.)

Katara: This is humiliating.
Sokka: Do you mean getting thoroughly spanked by the Fire Nation, (Katara turns her head towards her brother) or having to walk all the way to the Western Air Temple?
Katara: (She turns her head back) Both.
Aang: Sorry guys, but Appa (he stretches his hand out and affectionately scratches the area under Appa's eye) gets tired carrying all these people.

(Cut to a frontal shot of the whole group)

Teo: I wonder how the rest of the troops are.
Haru: (Cut to a close up shot of Haru's face) They're probably on their way to a prison. Seems like my dad just got out, now he's going back in.

(Cut to an overhead shot of Sokka and The Duke)

The Duke: I miss Pipsqueak.
Sokka: I miss not having blisters (Cut to an overhead shot behind Appa) on my feet.

(Cut to a close up of the rocky ground as Toph's foot stomps into screen. Cut to a close up of Toph with a relieved expression on her face.)

Toph: Hey, we're here. I can feel it.

(Camera pans out to show the group stopping near the edge of a cliff. The camera pans to the right to show a vast empty space filled with white mist in between the cliff they're standing on and the next.)

Katara :(off screen) Uh, I think your feet need their eyes checked.
Aang: (off screen) No, (Cut back to Aang with Sokka in the background) she's right, (Sokka looks up at Aang, stunned) we are here.

(Sokka looks around and brings up both his arms to show that he can't see anything. Cut to a frontal shot of the cliff with the group standing above it.)

Toph: Wow, (Camera slowly pans down to rows of rocky protrusions) it's amazing.

(Camera pans down further to show a multi-tiered structure of an upside down pagoda. Camera zooms out rapidly to show more upside down pagodas of the Western Air Temple with a couple of statues seemingly fixed into the cliffs.

Cut to a close up side view of one of the pagodas as a rope drops into screen. Zuko is then seen slowly sliding down the rope with his hands. Cut to the back of Zuko's head as he turns around. Cut to a large statue of a female airbender as Zuko stares at it. The camera follows him as he continues to make his descent. Cut to a wide side view shot of 3 statues as Zuko stops and swings himself on the rope, gaining momentum with each arc. He jumps off at the 4th swing. Cut to an area on the ground as Zuko lands into screen, balancing himself with a hand on the floor. He straightens up and looks around.

The screen flashes white to a flashback. Cut to a frontal shot of the cliff similar to the one Toph and the group were on earlier. Camera pans down to show the various natural structures through the mist of the temple.)

Iroh: (off screen) What a stunning view.

(Cut to a frontal shot of Zuko with Iroh behind him. Both are in their Season 1 outfits. Zuko has a large, white bandage over the scarred side of his face with a cloth strap secured in place.)

Zuko: The only view I'm interested in seeing (Iroh's expression changes into sadness) is the Avatar in chains.
Iroh: (He takes a step towards his nephew) You know, (Cut to an overhead shot of the 2 standing at the edge of a platform in front of the 3 statues present day Zuko landed on earlier) the Avatar hasn't been seen for a 100 years. (The camera pans down slowly) The chances of finding him here are very slim. (Cut to a shot of Zuko's bandaged side)
Zuko: First, we'll check each of the air temples. (takes a few steps forward, looking around) Then we'll scour the world, searching even the most remote locations until we find him.
Iroh: (Iroh looks on, concerned) Prince Zuko, it's only been a week since your banishment. (Cut to a far back view shot of the 2) You should take some time to heal and rest.
Zuko: (turns around and raises his voice) What else would I expect to hear from the laziest man in the Fire Nation? (Cut to a close up of Iroh's slightly appalled face as he looks down and sighs) The only way (Cut back to a frontal shot of uncle and nephew) to regain my honor is to find the Avatar. So I will.

(Iroh glances up at Zuko, turns, and walks away. Cut back to present day Zuko with his eyes closed. He groans and rubs his nose bridge with his fingers.

Appa growls off screen and Zuko looks towards his left, gasping in surprise and runs off screen. Cut to Zuko taking cover from behind a pillar as Appa flies into screen. Zuko crouches down.

Cut to a frontal shot of Zuko's face as he looks on from behind the pillar. He proceeds to stand up and walk off screen. Camera pans to the left to show him running up a flight of stairs.

Cut to a shot of an hour glass shaped fountain. Cut to Teo and The Duke looking up in wonder.)

Teo: It's so different from the Northern Air Temple. (Camera pans to a flight of stairs linking to a bridge) I wonder if there are any secret rooms.
Haru: (Haru runs into screen and waves a hand, beckoning the others to join him) Let's go check it out.

(Cut to The Duke and Teo as they enthusiastically make their way off screen. Aang runs after them but is stopped by Katara who blocks him with his staff.)

Katara: You guys go... (Aang catches his glider and Katara lays a hand on his shoulder) I think we need to talk about some things.

(Cut to the top of the bridge as Haru and The Duke help Teo onto it. As Haru sets Teo's wheelchair down, Teo wheels off rapidly.)

Haru: I'll race you, Duke.
The Duke: (annoyed) I told you, it's "The Duke."

(Haru and The Duke proceed to run after Teo. Cut to a close up of a disappointed Aang.)

Aang: Why can't I go?
Katara: (Cut to a serious Katara) We need to decide what we're gonna do now. And since you're the Avatar, maybe you should be a part of this.

(Cut to a flat, slightly broken down stone bench as Aang leans his staff against it and sits down and crosses his arms grouchily.)

Aang: Fair enough. So, what's the new plan?

(Cut to a wide shot of the Gaang with each of them sitting on stone benches except for Toph who is sitting on a rather tall stone column)

Sokka: Well, if you ask me, the new plan is the old plan. You just need to master all four elements, and confront the Fire Lord before the comet comes.
Aang: (sarcastically) Oh, yeah, that's great. (He picks up a pebble and tosses it into the air nonchalantly) No problem, (He continues fidgeting) I'll just do that. (He lays the pebble on the bench and flicks it away.)
Katara: Aang, no one said it's gonna be easy.
Aang: (continuing his little tantrum) Well, it's not even gonna be possible. Where am I supposed to get a firebending teacher?
Katara: (deep in thought) We could look for Jeong Jeong.
Aang: Yeah right, (He lies down on the bench without a care) like we'll ever run into Jeong Jeong again.
Toph: (Cut to a sideview of a confused Toph) Who's - Oh, (She folds her arms irritably) never mind. If it's important, I'll find out.

(Cut to another wide shot of the Gaang from a different angle as Aang stands up with his glider in hand)

Aang: Oh well, guess we can't come up with anybody. Why don't we (He jumps over Sokka's bench) just take a nice tour (He proceeds to run off screen as Momo follows him) around the temple?

(Cut to a shot of the mist as Aang's boot runs into screen and he unfolds his glider and leaps off the cliff. Momo flies into screen and joins his master in the mist as both of them fly upwards and off screen.)

Toph: (off screen) What's up with him? (Cut to the remaining 3)
Sokka: There's got (brings up his hands to his chin and thinks) to be someone who can teach him firebending.

(Katara and Toph look down dejectedly as the camera slowly pans up and fades to a smiling Zuko in a forested area.)

Zuko: Hello, (raises an arm in greeting) Zuko here. But I guess (rubs his hand against the back of his head nervously) you probably already know me... sort of. Uh...so, the thing is, (He puts his arm down and looks to the side hesitantly) I have a lot of firebending experience, and I'm (places an arm on chest with pride) considered to be pretty good at it. (He continues smiling) Well, you've seen me... you know, when I was attacking you? (His eyes widen at his verbal mistake) Uh, yeah...I guess (places his fingers against his forehead in embarrassment) I should apologize for that. But anyway, (waves an arm to the side dismissively) I'm good now. (clenches both fists and places one on his chest while the other arm is raised) I mean, I thought I was good before, but now I realize I was bad. (He gets visibly uncomfortable and drops his arms into a slouch) Ugh, but anyway... I think it's time I joined your group, and taught (straightens up with a sincere expression on his face) the Avatar firebending.

(The camera slowly zooms in on him. Cut to a sideview of Zuko to reveal him talking to a badger frog sitting on a large log. The tarp from Zuko's war balloon can be seen in the background and it has been used as a form of shelter. Cut to a frontal shot of the badger frog as it croaks.)

Zuko: (Cut to a close up of a frustrated Zuko) Well, what's your answer?!

(Cut to a sideview of Zuko as the frog ribbits and hops on Zuko's head before jumping off screen. Zuko slouches dejectedly.)

Zuko: Yeah, that's what I'd say too. (Cut to a far shot of Zuko's campsite as he raises his arm to his head in despair) How am I supposed to convince these people I'm on their side? What would Uncle do? (He proceeds to imitate Iroh's voice and pretends to hold an imaginary beard on his chin as he starts pacing.)

"Zuko, you have to look within yourself, to save yourself (He releases his finger and points) from your other self. (turns and paces in the opposite direction as he raises his finger as he pretends to be lecturing) Only then will your true self reveal itself." (Zuko sighs and presses a hand to his forehead) Even when I'm talking for him, I can't figure out what he means. What would Azula do? (Zuko raises the pitch of his voice and Azula's theme starts to play in the background.)

"Listen, Avatar, I can join your group (maneuvers his body into a position he thinks is feminine) or I can do something unspeakably horrible (folds his arms arrogantly) to you and your friends. Your choice." (stops and sits down) I guess I'm not that good at impersonations.

(The badger frog leaps in front of Zuko and croaks. Cut back to a wide shot of the upside down pagodas as Appa flies underneath them. Cut to a close up of the spires and Appa and Aang fly around them. Cut to Appa's saddle to show Katara and Toph inside it while Sokka steers towards a gliding Aang.)

Katara: Aang, can we talk about you learning firebending now?
Aang: (Cut to a close up of Aang as he feigns deaf) What? The wind is too loud in my ears. Check out this loop.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the mist as Aang maneuvers his glider into a loop and Momo mimics his actions in perfect sync.)

Sokka: (straining his voice against the rushing wind) Aang, (Appa continues to fly behind Aang) I think we should be making some plans about our future. (Cut back to a shot of the hour glass fountain as Aang and Appa land on the platform.)
Aang: Ok, we can do that while I show you the giant Pai Sho table. (Cut to a frontal shot of an excited Aang as the remainder of the Gaang descend from Appa behind him) Oh, you're gonna love the all-day echo chamber.
Toph: (Cut to a close up of Toph as she turns serious) I think that'll have to wait.

(Camera zooms out to show the Gaang looking at her quizzically. Toph points behind as Appa moves aside to reveal a shadow. The camera pans up to show the shadow belonging to Zuko. Cut to a close up of the Gaang as their expression changes from surprise to anger.)

Zuko: (Cut to a close up of Zuko's face) Hello, (raises his arm up in greeting) Zuko here.

(A sound effect of awkwardness chimes in the background. Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(Scene returns to a sideview shot of Zuko's confrontation with the Gaang back at the Western Air Temple. Cut to Aang as he raises his staff in an attacking position and the camera pans across the group to show the rest of them doing the same as well. Cut to a frontal shot of Zuko.)

Zuko: Hey, I heard you guys flying around down there, so I just thought (raises his shoulders) I'd wait for you here.

(Appa enters the screen and growls at Zuko as he takes a cautious step backwards and covers his face with his arms. Appa then proceeds to lick his back. Cut to a surprised Momo and Aang as he lowers his staff slightly. Cut back to Zuko as Appa licks his face affectionately. Zuko wipes off the slobber with his arm.)

Zuko: I know you must be surprised to see me here. (Cut to a sideview shot of the Gaang as they wear hostile expressions on their faces)
Sokka: Not really, since you've followed us all over the world.
Zuko: (Cut to a visibly uncomfortable Zuko) Right... Well, uh... anyway, what I wanted to tell you about is that I've changed, and I uh, (Cut to a slight overhead shot behind Zuko as the camera slowly pans upwards to show the Gaang) I'm good now. And, well, I think I should join your group.(Cut to a close up of Zuko's apprehensive face) Oh, and I can teach firebending... to you. (Cut to a confused Aang as he lowers his staff further. Cut to Katara in disbelief. Cut back to Zuko.) See, I uh...
Toph: (Cut to Toph as she interrupts Zuko. Sokka remains dumbfounded in the background) You want to what now?! (Camera pans down towards Katara and Sokka raises his fist in preparation for a fight)
Katara: You can't possibly think that any of us would trust you, can you? I mean, how stupid do you think we are?
Sokka: Yeah, all you've ever done is try to hunt us down (Cut to a sideview shot of Zuko) and capture Aang.
Zuko: (defensive) I've done some good things. (walks forward) I mean, I could've stolen your bison in Ba Sing Se, but I set him free. (He thrusts both arms out towards Appa to prove his point) That's something.

(Appa licks Zuko's back to his surprise. Cut back to Toph, Katara and Sokka.)

Toph: Appa (The siblings turn towards her) does seem to like him. (Brother and sister turn back angrily towards Zuko)
Sokka: He probably just covered himself in honey or something so that Appa would lick him. I'm not (swipes his arm aside in a "No" gesture) buying it.
Zuko: (Cut to a remorseful Zuko with Appa licking its lips in the background) I can understand why you wouldn't trust me, and I know I've made some mistakes (looks to the side in shame) in the past.
Sokka: (off screen) Like when you attacked our village?
Katara: (off screen) Or when you stole my mother's necklace (Cut to a sideview of the siblings) and used it to track us down (she takes a step forward with her fists clenched) and capture us?
Zuko: (Cut to a close up of his face) Look, I admit I've done some awful things. I was wrong (lowers his head down and presses a palm against his temple) to try to capture you, and I'm sorry that I attacked the Water Tribe. (Camera pans across the Gaang who are still not pleased with his presence) And I never should've sent that Fire Nation assassin after you. (Sokka and Toph widen their eyes in shock) I'm gonna try to stop him.
Sokka: (interrupts) Wait, you sent (unsheathes his boomerang and holds it towards Zuko) Combustion Man after us?
Zuko: (Cut back to a slightly panicking Zuko) Well, that's not his name, but...
Sokka: (off screen) Oh, sorry. (Cut back to a frontal shot of Toph and Sokka as he remains in a defensive position) I didn't mean to insult your friend.
Zuko: (raising his voice) He's not my friend!
Toph (Cut to a visibly angry Toph) That guy (points an accusing finger at Zuko) locked me and Katara in jail and tried to blow us (swipes her hand down audibly) all up.
Zuko: (Cut back to Zuko who closes his eyes and opens them as he angles his head diagonally) Why aren't you saying anything? (Cut to Aang's back with Zuko still in view) You once said you thought we could be (Zuko shrugs) friends. (Aang looks down to the side, pondering) You know I (Cut to a frontal shot of Aang as he remains deep in thought) have good in me.

(Aang looks towards the rest of the Gaang. Cut to a sideview of the 3 of them as Sokka shakes his head at Aang. Cut back to Aang as he looks back at Zuko.)

Aang: There's no way we can trust you after everything you've done. (Cut back to Zuko who listens intently) We'll never let you join us. (Zuko's expression changes to surprise)
Katara: (off screen) You need to get out of here, now.
Zuko: (closes his eyes for a moment before opening them and staring back at the group with determination. Cut to back the slight overhead shot behind Zuko again.) I'm trying to explain (raises both arms in frustration and takes a few steps towards them) that I'm not that person anymore. (He continues to walk to the group but Sokka takes a step forward and thrusts his boomerang out as a warning. Zuko takes a step back.)
Sokka: Either you leave, or we attack.
Zuko: (aghast) If you won't accept me as a friend, (Cut to a shot of the ground in front of Zuko as he kneels down with his head bowed) then maybe you'll take me (raises both arms out as if he was holding an offering but his fists are clenched) as a prisoner.
Katara: (Cut to an angry Katara) No, we won't!

(She proceeds to draw water from her water skin and waterbends it towards the screen. Cut back to Zuko as he gets pushed off screen by the small wave of water. Cut to Zuko lying facedown on the ground in a puddle of water sopping wet.)

Katara: (off screen) Get out of here (Zuko rolls himself onto his back and the camera pans up towards the Gaang) and don't come back. And if we ever see you again...Well, (Sokka takes a step towards Zuko) we'd better not see you again!

(Cut back to a shocked Zuko with water dripping from his hair as he closes his eyes in defeat. Cut to a sideview of the confrontation as Zuko stands up and walks towards the camera, away from the Gaang. The Sun is starting to set as the inside of the temple glows slightly orange. Cut to an angry Aang and Katara as they watch him leave. The camera slowly zooms in on Aang as he drops his head in thought.

Cut to the edge of the cliff as the camera pans up to the vast forest. Cut back to Zuko's tarp as Zuko walks into screen with his hands up on his head.)

Zuko: Argh, I can't believe how stupid (thrusts both arms outwards as he exits the screen) I am. I mean, (walks back into screen) what was I thinking? (lays a head on his forehead as his expression turns into sheer despair and utter horror) Telling them I sent an assassin after them? Why didn't I just say Azula (thrusts his arm out behind him) did that? They (He brings his head towards the camera) would've believed that. Stupid!

(He brings his hand to his forehead again. Cut to a sideview of the scene to show the badger frog sitting on the log, staring at him. It croaks and Zuko slouches forward. He then kneels on the ground and sighs in frustration. Cut back to an overhead shot of the hour glass shaped fountain. Cut to an overhead shot of the Gaang standing near the doors of a chamber.)

Katara: Why would he try to fool us like that? (Katara starts walking into the chamber)
Sokka: Obviously, he wants to lead us into some kind of trap.
Katara: This is just like when we were in prison together in Ba Sing Se. (Cut to a sideview of the 3 to show the siblings each holding a sleeping bag while Aang holds a jar) He starts talking about his mother, (Aang proceeds to walk off screen) and making it seem like he's an actual human being with feelings.
Sokka: He wants you (Katara turns towards him) to trust him and feel sorry for him, so you let your guard down, then he strikes. (punches his fist out)
Katara: (Cut to a back view of Sokka with his sister still in sight) The thing is, it worked. (kneels and sets the sleeping bag down) I did feel sorry for him. I felt like he was really confused and hurt. (looks around) But obviously when the time came, (stands up) he made his choice, and we paid the price. (Cut to a close up of Katara as she turns angry) We can't trust him.
Aang: (off screen) I kind of (Katara turns her head towards him) have a confession to make. (Cut to Aang's back) Remember when you two were sick and I got captured by (turns his body slightly so his side is facing the camera) Zhao?
Sokka: (Cut to an outraged Sokka) And you made us suck on frozen frogs? How could I forget? (throws down his sleeping bag) I had a wart on the flap that hangs down from the back of my throat for a month!

(He takes a step towards the camera as he opens his mouth and points a finger towards it. Cut to the inside of his mouth looking out towards Aang. His uvula appears normal.)

Katara: (off screen) Sokka, (Sokka turns towards his visibly annoyed sister as his uvula flaps around slightly) I looked at it and told you there was nothing there.
Sokka: (Cut back to a frontal shot of Sokka as he argues) I could feel it! It's my throatal flap. (Cut to outside the chamber looking in at the Gaang)
Aang: Anyway, when Zhao had me chained up, it was Zuko (the siblings turn towards him) who came in and got me out. (Cut to a close up of Aang's face) He risked his life to save me. (Cut to a sideview of the 3 as Katara steps forward)
Katara: No way, (brings her arms up and thrusts them to the side) I'm sure (punches her fists down) he only did it (crosses her arms) so he could capture you himself.
Sokka: Yeah, (steps towards Aang) face it Aang. You're nothing but a big prize to him.
Aang: You're probably right.
Katara: And what was (punches her fists down again) all that crazy stuff about setting Appa free? (crosses her arms once more) What a liar.
Toph :(off screen)Actually, (The 3 of them turn towards her. Cut to Toph leaning nonchalantly against the door) he wasn't lying.
Sokka: (Cut back to the siblings) Oh, hooray. (throws his arms up sarcastically) In a lifetime of evil, at least (brings his hands to his cheek and puts on a mocking friendly face) he didn't add animal cruelty to the list. (He brings his hands down and looks back at Toph angrily)
Toph: (off screen) I'm just saying that (Cut back to Toph with an empathetic expression on her face) considering his messed-up family, and how he was raised, he could've turned out a lot worse. (Cut back to Aang and Katara)
Katara: You're right, (thrusts her arms down as Aang looks towards her) Toph, let's go find him (raises her arms up) and give him a medal. (She says this with sarcasm) The "not as much of a jerk as you could have been" award.
Toph: (Cut to a sideview of Toph with her arms crossed) All I know is that while he was talking to us, he was sincere. Maybe (brings an arm up with her palm facing upwards) you're all just letting your hurt feelings keep you from thinking clearly. (Cut to a frontal shot of the 3)
Katara: (standing her ground) Easy for you to say, you weren't there (takes a step forward and points to the side) when he had us attacked by pirates.
Sokka: (clenches his fist) Or when he burned down Kyoshi Island.
Aang: Or when he tried to capture me (Cut back to Toph) at the fire temple. (Cut back to a frontal shot of the 3 again)
Katara: Why would you (brings her hands up and throws them down rapidly in hot anger) even try to defend him?
Toph: (Cut back to the blind bandit) Because Katara, (walks off screen) you're all ignoring (Cut to full view of the Gaang as Toph confronts them) one crucial fact. Aang needs (Cut to a sideview of Aang as Toph enters the screen and jabs a finger on his chest repeatedly to prove her point) a firebending teacher. We can't think (her expression changes to frustration as she walks away from him) of a single person in the world to do the job. (Cut back to a full view of the group as Toph walks around defensively) Now one shows up on a silver platter, (stomps her feet on the ground as the camera shakes slightly) and you (points to an accusing finger to Katara) won't even think (she stomps her other foot on the ground) about it?

(Cut to a close up of a slightly remorseful Katara as she thinks about her words and looks towards Aang. Cut to a view of Aang and Toph baring her teeth in anger.)

Aang: I'm not having Zuko as my teacher. (He walks off screen and Toph's expression changes to surprise. Cut to a full view of the Gaang as Aang walks to an area behind Katara with his back towards them.)
Sokka: You're darn right (Sokka takes a step towards his sister and it appears like a 3 versus 1 standoff) you're not, buddy.
Katara: Well, (crosses her arms) I guess that's settled.
Toph: (Cut to a frontal shot of Toph's face as she groans in frustration and turns her back) I'm beginning to wonder who's really the blind one (walks out of the chamber) around here.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the chamber as Toph continues to walk off. Fade to Zuko's campsite at night. Zuko has lit a campfire in front of his shelter. He appears to be sleeping. Cut to a close up of the slumbering prince. Leaves and twigs can be heard rustling in the background and Zuko wakes up groggily. Cut to an overhead shot of Zuko as he pushes his upper body off the ground and stares beyond the campfire.)

Zuko: Who's there? (Cut to a frontal shot of Zuko as he sweeps his arm in an arc and firebends) Stay back.
Toph: (Cut to Toph as she earthbends a rock pillar in front of her as a form of protection from the fire) It's me! style="mso-spacerun: yes"> (Cut to the ground behind Toph's feet as the fire circles around the pillar. Toph takes a step back into the burning flames) Ow!

(Cut to a sideview of Toph as she throws her head back in agony and falls down off screen. Cut to an appalled Zuko as he rubs his eyes and brings them down to take a good look at whom he has accidentally burned. Cut back to Toph sitting on the ground with the soles of her feet visibly red and raw.)

Toph: You burned my feet!
Zuko: (Cut to Zuko as he gets off the ground) I'm sorry, it was a mistake! (proceeds to run off screen)
Toph: (Cut back to a frightened Toph as she uses her hands to push herself back) Get away (she throws a chunk of earth from the ground towards Zuko who is off screen) from me!

(She gets on her knees and crawls while earthbending chunks of earth back to Zuko. Cut to Zuko as he dodges the chunks deftly. Cut to Zuko's back view as he continues to dodge the rocks Toph continuously throws at him. Cut to a frontal shot of desperate and visibly terrified Toph as she continues to crawl away. Zuko catches up to her.)

Zuko: Let me (his hands are in a pleading gesture) help you. (Toph sends a chunk of earth back as he dodges it) I'm sorry.

(Toph earthbends another slab of earth as Zuko dodges it again. He lays a hand on her shoulder.)

Toph: Get off me, (she turns around and pushes Zuko away) get off me!

(Cut to an overhead shot of Toph as she thrusts her palms out. Cut to a shocked Zuko as a column of earth rises into screen, hits him in the chest and propels him away. Cut to an area behind Zuko as he lands on his back and proceeds to sit up.)

Zuko: (Cut to a frontal shot of an apologetic Zuko) I didn't know it was you. (He tries to move forward but holds his side and grimaces in pain. Cut to Zuko's back view as Toph is seen crawling away.) Come back! (Toph disappears into the darkness. Cut back to Zuko as he lies down and groans in frustration. Cut to an overhead shot of the campsite as Zuko brings up his hands to his head in despair, bends his knees and rolls slightly on his sides.) Why am I so bad at being good?

(He throws his limbs out into a star shape and relaxes. Fade to commercial break.)



Act III

(Scene returns to an overhead shot of the large fountain at the Western Air Temple, surrounded by the group, minus Toph. Cut to a shot of a large urn full of steaming hot rice. Katara takes some rice out with a wooden spoon and puts it in a bowl with a pair of chopsticks. Cut to a zoomed out shot of everyone.)

Katara: (passing the bowl to The Duke) Has anyone seen Toph?
Sokka: I haven't seen her since she stormed off yesterday.
Haru: Maybe she's just exploring the air temple. There are some pretty fun spots to practice earthbending.
Katara: (worried) I think we should go look for her.
Sokka: Oh, let her have fun with her rocks. I'm in no rush to have her yelling at us again.
The Duke: We can go check for her.
Teo: (rolls in from off screen) Yeah, I want to ride that tunnel down to the hall of statues again. It'll work a lot better now that I fixed my brakes.

(Teo pulls his break stick and rolls off, kicking up a cloud of dust. Cut to a zoomed out shot as Teo, Haru, and The Duke leave Aang, Sokka, and Katara. Cut to a shot of Aang, Sokka, and Katara sitting around the urn. A loud rumble is heard and they flinch as the ground shakes. They turn their heads to see a large cloud of dust. Cut to a shot of a large pile of rocks beneath a newly formed hole in the wall. A few more rocks fall to the ground as Toph climbs out of the hole and slides to the floor, grunting in pain. Cut to a shot behind and above Toph as Aang, Sokka, and Katara come from around the stone pillar and run towards her.)

Katara: Toph, what happened?
Toph: My feet got burned.
Katara: (examining Toph's feet) Oh, no, what happened?
Toph: (annoyed) I just told you, my feet got burned.
Katara: I meant how.
Toph: Well, I kind of went to see Zuko last night.
Aang: (shocked) You what!?
Katara: (shocked) Zuko?
Sokka: (shocked) Ugh!
Toph: I just thought he could be helpful to us. And if I talked to him, maybe we could work something out.

(Katara bends water out of her water skin and around Toph's feet to heal them)

Aang: So he attacked you?
Toph: Well, he did and he didn't. It was sort of an accident.
Aang: But he did firebend at you?
Toph: Yes.
Sokka: See, you trusted Zuko and you got burned... literally.
Katara: (cut to a close up of Toph's feet as Katara bends the water away and back into her water skin) It's gonna take a while for your feet to get better. I wish I could've worked on them sooner.
Toph: Yeah, me too.
Sokka: Zuko's clearly too dangerous to be left alone. We're gonna have to go after him.
Aang: (disappointed) I hate to go looking for a fight, but you're right. After what he did to Toph, I don't think we have a choice.
Sokka: He's crafty, but we'll find a way to capture him.
Toph: (Aang and Sokka take her arms and lift her up) Maybe just invite him back here. He's already offered himself up as a prisoner once.
Sokka: Yeah... get him to come back and say he'll be our prisoner. Then we'll jump him and really make him our prisoner. He'll never suspect it.
Katara: You are a master of surprise, Sokka.

(Sokka and Aang carry Toph off screen and Katara follows them. Cut to a close up of the edge of the fountain water as Sokka and Aang set Toph down on it, letting her dip her feet in the water.

Toph: Ahh, that's the stuff. Now I know how the rest of you guys feel. Not being able to see with your feet stinks.

(Cut to a wide overhead shot of the fountain. The camera pulls back to reveal Combustion Man standing on a ledge high above them. Cut to a close up of Combustion Man and slowly zoom in on his face as he looks down and narrows his eyes. Cut to his perspective as he follows Aang, who is carrying a towel over to Katara. Cut back to the close up of Combustion man as he rears his head back and inhales, preparing to fire a blast of energy. Quickly cut to Zuko swinging on a vine towards Combustion Man, bumping into him just as he fires. Cut to a shot of the beam hitting the ledge above the fountain and exploding. Cut to a shot from behind of Aang, Sokka, Toph and Katara shielding them from the falling rock. Cut to a shot of them from the front as Aang and Sokka pick up Toph to take her away, but stop when they hear Zuko.)

Zuko: (off screen) Stop! (cut to a shot of Zuko walking towards Combustion Man as he stands back up) I don't want you hunting the Avatar anymore.

(Cut to a quick close up of Aang looking up with shock as he is helping Sokka carry Toph. Cut back to Zuko as he stands in front of Combustion man, arms spread out to block him)

Zuko: The mission is off. I'm ordering you to stop!

(Combustion Man shoves Zuko out of the way and fires another blast at the top of the fountain, destroying it. Aang, Sokka, Katara, and Toph take duck behind the ledge, covering their heads. Cut to a shot of Zuko running towards the camera. The camera zooms in of his hand as he pulls it back and surrounds it in flames.)

Zuko: If you keep attacking, I won't pay you! (Combustion Man stops Zuko in his tracks by grabbing him by the shirt. Zuko throws his fireball, but misses and it hits the ground) All right, I'll pay you double to stop!

(Zuko swings his arms down, making Combustion Man let go. He turns and executes a shot jumping sidekick just as Combustion Man fires another shot, knocking his aim off and knocking Zuko away. Cut to a shot of the edge of the fountain water as Aang looks at the incoming blast with fright and ducks his head. Cut to a far shot from the side as the blast of energy travels down past the ledge where the fountain is and explodes as it makes contact with an upside down pagoda below it.

Cut to a shot behind Zuko landing on his hands and feet, and then quickly zoom out until Combustion Man's feet step into the shot. Cut to a close up of Zuko as he turns around, a look of shock on his face. The camera quickly rotates around towards Combustion Man as he inhales and fires a blast at the camera. Cut to a shot of Zuko creating a shield of fire. The blast hits it and explodes. Cut to a shot of Zuko from the side as the blast pushes him across the floor. Cut to an overhead shot as the camera follows the smoke. It passes the edge of the ledge, leaving no sign of Zuko. Cut to a shot of Aang, Katara, and Sokka looking over the edge of the fountain in shock. Cut to a shot from behind Combustion Man as he faces a small crater in the floor and the smoke that is dissipating. Cut to a shot of the edge of the ledge and strafe right, revealing climbing a vine hanging underneath it.

Cut to Combustion Man as he turns back. Cut to a close up of Aang as he stands up from behind the fountain pool and runs to the side. Cut to a shot of Aang doing a spinning back kick, airbending and kicking up the dust around him, then leaping straight up just as a blast from Combustion Man explodes beneath him. The camera turns up to Aang spinning in mid air, airbending a tornado and kicking it at Combustion Man. Combustion Man leaps over the tornado and fires another blast as he descends. Aang lands and quickly back flips away from the blast, landing next to Katara and Sokka.

Cut to a shot of Combustion Man falling, then cut to a shot of his metal, clawed hand as it catches on a small ledge and breaks it, slowing his fall. He lands on a new ledge and rolls, firing a blast just as he stops. Cut to a shot of Katara and Aang shielding themselves as the blast hits the fountain water. The camera follows Katara as she runs forward and bends the water from the pool. Cut to a far shot from the side as Katara bends a huge wave up between them and Combustion Man. Cut to a shot in front of the camera as she descends from jumping, bringing her arms down and crossing them and giving a battle cry. The wave matches her arm movements and icicles in both directions. Cut to a shot of Combustion Man as the icicles speed towards him. He brings his metal arm over his face and lifts his metal leg to shield him from the attack. The icicles break against him. Combustion Man flings his arms down to shake off the ice shards and steps forward, an angry frown on his face. Cut to his perspective as he scans the area. The group is nowhere to be seen.

Cut to a shot of Sokka, Aang, Katara, and Toph all hiding behind the large stone pillar, out of Combustion Man's view. There's a sound of another blast, and the camera turns to the side as the beam of energy hits a different pillar and explodes, destroying it. The group raises their arms to protect themselves from any flying debris. Cut to a shot of Toph sitting on the ground.)

Toph: (urgent) He's going to blast this whole place right off the cliff side.

(Cut to a shot of Katara peeking out from behind the pillar, then pulling back as another blast explodes.)

Katara: I can't step out to waterbend at him without getting blown up. And I can't get a good enough angle on him from down here.
Sokka: (thinks for a moment, then comes up with an idea) I know how to get an angle on him.

(Sokka gently pushes Katara aside and pulls out his boomerang. He presses his back against the pillar. Cut to a far shot of Sokka peeking out from behind the pillar and another blast exploding on the ground. Cut to a close up of Sokka looking around the pillar as smoke billows past. Cut to Sokka's perspective as he watches the two blasts of energy shoot out from behind a stone pillar and explode on the ground. He raises his boomerang towards the source of the blasts and measures their trajectory. Cut to a shot of Sokka from the side as he figures out the right angles and raises his boomerang. Cut to a closer shot of Sokka.)

Sokka: All right buddy, don't fail me now.

(Sokka throws the boomerang. Cut to a shot of the boomerang as it flies through the air and curves behind a stone pillar. Cut to a shot of Combustion Man from above. The camera zooms as he inhales for another blast. He turns at the sound of the boomerang and the camera zooms in on the eye tattoo on his forehead. There's a white flash as the boomerang hits his head, and we cut to a shot of him being knocked down by it. Cut to a close up of Sokka grinning happily, then running out from behind the pillar, followed by the rest of the group. Cut to an over head shot of them as the boomerang flies back to Sokka.)

Sokka: (jumps and catches the boomerang triumphantly) Yeah, boomerang! (he and Katara look up smiling, but quickly frown. Cut to a shot of Combustion Man standing back up and putting a hand to his forehead. Cut back to Sokka as he looks at his boomerang disappointedly) Aw, boomerang...

(The group starts to run back towards the stone pillar they were hiding behind. Cut to a shot from behind Combustion Man as the group runs away down below. Cut to a shot in front of him, dizzied from the attack to his head. He sways and rears his head back for another blast. Cut to Combustion Man's perspective as his vision blurs. Cut back to the shot of him as he inhales and tries to fire a blast of energy. Sparks fly from his forehead. Cut to a farther out shot and pan around Combustion Man as small explosions erupt from his head. He puts a hand over his forehead. Cut to a shot of the upside down pagoda he is standing on and quickly zoom out as a massive explosion destroys it.. Out of the smoke and debris is a glint of light, and Combustion Man's metal, clawed arm flies towards the camera. Cut to a shot of the structure falling into the misty chasm below. Cut to a shot from below of the edge of the cliff as Sokka, Katara, and Aang look down in shock. Cut to a shot from the side as the three of them stare at each other, speechless. Cut to a far shot of the large metal doors behind the fountain. Haru and Teo peek out from behind one of the doors. Cut to a closer shot of them, perplexed, as The Duke also peeks out from behind the door. Cut back to the side view of Aang, Katara, and Sokka as they look upward. Cut to a shot of Zuko climbing up the vine from earlier. Cut to a close up of him reaching the ledge and pulling himself up.

The scene fades to a slow sweeping shot of the misty canyon, and then cuts to a shot from above and behind the metal doors of Zuko walking towards the group facing him. Cut to a shot of Aang, Sokka, Katara, and Toph, who is sitting on a large rock. Aang hangs his head down.)

Aang: I can't believe I'm saying this... but thanks Zuko.
Sokka: Hey, and what about me? I did the boomerang thing. (gestures)
Zuko: (walking towards them) Listen, I know I didn't explain myself very well yesterday. I've been through a lot in the past few years, and it's been hard. But I'm realizing that I had to go through all those things to learn the truth. I thought I had lost my honor, and that somehow my father could return it to me. But I know now that no one can give you your honor. It's something you earn for yourself, by choosing to do what's right. All I want now is to play my part in ending this war. And I know my destiny is to help you restore balance to the world.

(Cut to a close up of Aang's profile as his expression softens. Cut to a shot from behind Toph and Aang. Zuko looks to Toph.)

Zuko: I'm sorry for what I did to you. (he bows to Toph) It was an accident. Fire can be dangerous and wild. So as a firebender, I need to be more careful and control my bending so I don't hurt people unintentionally.

(Cut to a close up of Aang as his expression changes to one of surprise and realization. He looks down in though for a second before looking back up to Zuko.)

Aang: I think you are supposed to be my firebending teacher. When I first tried to learn firebending, I burned Katara. And after that, I never wanted to firebend again. But now I know you understand how easy it is to hurt the people you love. (he bows to Zuko) I'd like you to teach me.

(Cut to a close up of Zuko's profile. He smiles warmly. Cut to a shot from the side of Zuko and Aang. Zuko bows to Aang.)

Zuko: Thank you. I'm so happy you've accepted me into your group.
Aang: Not so fast. I still have to ask my friends if it's ok with them. Toph, you're the one that Zuko burned. What do you think?
Toph: (quiet for a second) Go ahead and let him join. It'll give me plenty of time to get back at him for burning my feet.
Aang: Sokka?
Sokka: (closes his eyes and hangs his head a second, then shrugs) Hey, all I want is to defeat The Fire Lord. If you think this is the way to do it, then I'm all for it.

(Aang nods to Sokka and turns to Katara.)

Aang: Katara?

(Katara looks at Zuko and frowns. Cut to the close up profile of Zuko as he waits anxiously for the answer, beads of sweat rolling down his cheek. Cut back to Katara as she closes her eyes, then looks to Aang.)

Katara: I'll go along with whatever you think is right.

(Aang smiles at Katara. Cut to Zuko.)

Zuko: (excitedly) I won't let you down, I promise.

(The group turns and walks away, Sokka carrying Toph. Cut to a shot of Zuko smiling as he watches them leave. Cut to an overhead shot of them as the group walks past the metal doors. The scene fades to a panning down shot of Zuko with his belongings following Sokka down a hallway to a door. Cut to a closer shot of the two of them. Sokka stops and gestures to the room as Zuko walks past.)

Sokka: So here you go, home sweet home. I guess, you know, for now. (cut to a shot looking through the window of Zuko inside the bare room and Sokka looking in through the door) Unpack... lunch soon. Uh...welcome aboard? (Zuko turns and smiles at Sokka. Cut to a close up of Sokka staring back before turning away.)Yeah. (cut to a shot outside the room as Sokka walks up to Aang) Ok, this is really, really weird.

(Aang and Sokka walk away. Cut to a shot of Zuko sitting on the bed and unpacking. He pulls out a picture. A close up of it reveals it to be a small portrait of Iroh. Cut to a shot of Zuko's face. The scene fades to a flashback of the same shot of Zuko, bandage covering his eye.)

Zuko: If I have to, I will spend every day of the rest of my life hunting the Avatar. I know it's my destiny to capture him.

(Iroh places his hand on Zuko's shoulder from off screen and the camera zooms out to reveal him.)

Iroh: You know, Prince Zuko, destiny is a funny thing. You never know how things are going to work out. But if you keep an open mind and an open heart, I promise you will find your own destiny someday.

(Cut to the same shot of Zuko, then fade back to Zuko in the present, smiling and nodding his head. He then opens his eyes with slight alarm and turns his head. The camera turns towards the door to reveal Katara leaning against the frame. Zuko stands up and faces her, about to say something, but Katara speaks first.)

Katara: (venomously) You might have everyone else here buying your "transformation". But you and I both know you've struggled with doing the right thing in the past. (walks up to Zuko and leans forward threateningly) So let me tell you something right now. You make one step backward, one slip-up, give me one reason to think you might hurt Aang... and you won't have to worry about your destiny anymore. Because I'll make sure your destiny ends right then and there... permanently.

(Katara turns and walks away. Cut to a close up of Zuko and slowly zoom out. Cut to a wide shot of the room from behind them and slowly zoom out as Katara leaves through the door and closes it behind her. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence, including clips from "The Western Air Temple".]



Act I

(The episode opens up to the sky and the camera slowly pans down to an upside down pagoda in The Western Air Temple)

Zuko: (off screen) I know you're nervous, (the camera stops and reveals Zuko and Aang standing at the balcony of one of the pagoda's) but remember... firebending in and of itself is not something to fear.
Aang: (Cut to close-up shot of Aang who sighs and looks hesitant) Ok. Not something to fear. (he still looks unsure)
Zuko: (Cut to Zuko crossing his arms) But if you don't respect it, (raises his voice, camera zooms in on his face to emphasize the point of treating fire with respect) it'll chew you up and spit you out like an angry komodo rhino!

(Cut to Aang who gives a yelp of fear)

Zuko: Now show me what you've got. Any amount of fire you can make.

(Aang exhales, takes in a nervous breath and attempts to firebend. The camera cuts to his palm which releases a small cloud of smoke which dissipates within a second. Camera moves to the left to show Aang smiling sheepishly.)

Aang: Maybe I need a little more instruction. Perhaps a demonstration?
Zuko: (Camera zooms up to show an aerial view of where they're standing) Good idea. You might want to take a couple steps back.

(He gestures Aang to move backward and Aang does so. Cut to a close-up of Zuko who takes in a breath, grunts and proceeds to firebend. Camera zooms out to show that the result is a rather small pathetic burst of flame. The music emphasizes his failure in a comical way. Aang applauds.)

Zuko: (Zuko recoils back in confusion) What was that?! That was the worst firebending I've ever seen! (moves his hand in a "What is wrong?!" gesture)
Aang: (looks to the floor) I thought it was, (looks back at Zuko) nice. (shrugs)

(Zuko grunts again and firebends in rapid succession. All his flames are small like the first. He grunts in frustration and stares at his palms)

Zuko: (angrily) Why is this happening?!
Aang: Maybe it's the altitude.
Zuko: (turns away from Aang) Yeah, could be. (looks unsure and lost)

(Camera pans around the temple and drops down to Zuko and Aang, who have found a spot lower in altitude. Aang is sitting on a broken pillar and watches Zuko firebend with the same results. Zuko grunts in frustration and unleashes another blast with no improvement. Aang yawns and lies down.)

Zuko: Just breathe, and... (pauses to firebend again.)

(Cut to Aang who sits up)

Aang: That one kind of felt hot.
Zuko: (lashes out) Don't patronize me. You know what it's supposed to look like! (throws his hand out)
Aang: Sorry Sifu Hotman.
Zuko: (raises his arms and shouts) And stop calling me that! (Aang cringes)

(Cut to Sokka walking into screen and biting on an apple. He finds a spot and sits down to observe the two.)

Sokka: Hey, jerks. Mind if I watch you two jerks do your jerk bending?
Zuko: Get out of here! (makes a "Get lost" movement with his arm)
Sokka:(looking amused) Ok, take it easy. (drops his apple core, waves his hand in dismissal) I was just kidding around. (stands up to adjust his shirt) Jerk bending, still got it. (Zuko drops his head down and moans while Aang looks on)

(Scene changes to night at the temple. Appa is seen resting near one of the fountains. Camera zooms in to Appa licking a small bale of hay. Camera moves to the right to reveal Zuko leaning on a column with his arms crossed, deep in thought. He turns his head back to the campfire where everyone is settled for dinner. He walks toward them.)

Zuko: Listen everybody; (everyone turns their head towards him) I've got some pretty bad news. I've lost my stuff. (drops his head dejectedly)
Toph: (cut to Toph who raises both arms to show she's innocent) Don't look at me. I didn't touch your stuff. (folds arms)
Zuko: I'm talking about my firebending. It's gone.

(Camera moves out to show Teo, Sokka, Haru and The Duke looking at him. The Duke attempts to sit up. Katara laughs maniacally. Camera pans to show that everyone is looking at her. Cut to Zuko who looks annoyed.)

Katara: I'm sorry. I'm just laughing at the irony. You know... how it would have been nice for us if you lost your firebending a long time ago?
Zuko: Well it's not lost. It's just weaker for some reason.
Katara: (holding up her bowl and glaring daggers at Zuko) Maybe you're just not as good as you think you are.
Toph: Ouch.
Zuko: I bet it's because I changed sides.
Katara: That's ridiculous. (drinks the contents in the bowl)
Aang: I don't know. Maybe it isn't. Maybe your firebending comes from
rage, and you just don't have enough anger to fuel it the way you used to.
Sokka: (Cut to Sokka who enters comically into screen) So, all we need to do is make Zuko angry... easy enough.

(He proceeds to nudge Zuko in the waist and head with the hilt of his sword several times.)

Zuko: (bellows) Ok, cut it out! (Sokka stops what he is doing and his sword falls on his head) Look... even if you're right, (rubs the bridge of his nose) I don't want to rely on hate and anger anymore. There has to be another way.
Toph: You're gonna need to learn to draw your firebending (Sokka enters the screen, rubbing his head) from a different source. I recommend
the original source. (puts food into her mouth and chews)
Sokka: How's he supposed to do that? By jumping into a volcano?
Toph: (swallows her food) No. Zuko needs to go back to whatever the original source of firebending is.
Sokka: So is it jumping into a volcano?
Toph: I don't know. For earthbending, (Camera slowly zooms in on Toph's face) the original benders were badgermoles.

(Cut to a flashback. A younger Toph in her fancy gown is seen kneeling in a dark cave.)

Toph: (voiceover) One day, when I was little, I ran away and hid in a cave.

(Cut to young Toph who is crying. The screen suddenly rumbles and a wall behind Toph explodes. She opens her eyes in shock and fear. Camera cuts to the back of Toph. The cloud of dust settles and a foot of a badgermole stomps into screen.)

Toph: That's where I met them.

(Toph cringes in fear. The badgermole's snout comes into screen and sniffs the little girl. Toph sniffs back and the badgermole licks her cheek with its giant tongue and she giggles with delight. She feels the badgermole's snout with both hands before licking it and giggles once again.)

Toph: They were blind, just like me, (The badgermole moves away from Toph and she attempts to crawl after it) so we understood each other. I was able to learn earthbending, (Cut to the top view of the badgermole which moves its paws in a sweeping motion) not just as a martial art, but as an
extension of my senses. (Camera fades in to the top view of Toph who is mimicking its actions) For them, the original earthbenders, (The badgermole senses a pile of rocks and earthbends them to the side) wasn't just about fighting. It was their way of interacting with the World.

(Toph stops crawling and stands up. She earthbends a small boulder and smiles at her success)

(Camera fades back to Toph in the temple)

Aang: (off screen) That's amazing, Toph. I learned from the monks, but the original airbenders were the Sky Bison.

(Camera slowly zooms out from the group to show a mural of 3 sky bisons overlooking the campfire.) Maybe you can give me a lesson sometime buddy.

(Cut back to Aang who leans back to address Appa. Appa growls in acknowledgement.)

Zuko: Well, this doesn't help me. The original firebenders were the dragons, and they're extinct.
Aang: What do you mean? Roku had a dragon, and there were plenty of
dragons when I was a kid.
Zuko: (defensive) Well, they aren't around anymore, ok?
Aang: Ok, ok. (moves his arm around in an appeasing gesture) I'm sorry.
Zuko: But maybe there's another way. (walks towards the fountain) The first people to learn from the dragons were the ancient Sun Warriors.
Aang: (He comes into screen and joins Zuko) Sun Warriors? Well, I know they weren't around when I was a kid.
Zuko: No, they died off thousands of years ago, but their civilization wasn't too far from where we are now. Maybe we can learn something by poking around their ruins.
Aang: It's like the monks used to tell me. Sometimes, the shadows of the past can be felt by the present.
Sokka: (off screen) So, what? (Zuko and Aang turn their head towards the voice) Maybe you'll pick up some super old Sun Warrior energy just by standing (moving his hand in a fluttering motion) where they stood 1000 years ago?
Zuko: More or less. Either I find a new way to firebend, or the Avatar has to find a new teacher. (Aang looks worried)

(Cut to commercial break)



Act II

(The show returns to Appa flying over a vast ocean. Cut to Zuko who looks bored)

Zuko: We've been riding for hours. I don't know why, but I thought this thing would be a lot faster. (He looks down and the camera zooms out to show Appa's underbelly. Appa growls.)
Aang: Appa's right, Zuko. In our group, typically we start out our missions with a more upbeat attitude.
Zuko: (in a low voice) I can't believe this. (sighs and rests his head on the boat)
Aang: Don't worry. You'll get the hang of it.

(Appa pushes his tail down to gain some speed and soars through the cloud at a faster speed. Cut to Appa nearing an island. Cut again to him nearing a bunch of ruins with a very impressive architecture similar to that of the Mayans.

Simultaneously, with looks of surprise on their faces)

Zuko and Aang: Whoa!

(Cut to Appa descending on to the ruins)

Zuko:(off screen) Even though these buildings are ancient, (The camera is facing a vast plain of grass, it slowly pans down towards the ruins. Aang and Zuko are seen walking in a small "valley") there's something eerily familiar about them. I can tell the Fire Sages' temples are somehow descended from these.
Aang:(off screen) Ok, we learned something about architecture. (The camera pans around the various structures. Cut back to the duo.) Hopefully, we'll learn something about firebending too. The past can be a great teacher.

(Aang's foot nears a black wire and he trips it. He yells in surprise. The ground in front of them drops to reveal a bed of black, deadly spikes. Aang exhales a huge gust of air from his mouth to prevent himself from falling into the trap and propels himself across it, landing rather shakingly to the other side. He struggles to control his balance, flailing his arms about. Aang pushes himself forward and regains control.)

Aang: (frightened) Zuko, I think the past is trying to kill me.
Zuko: (He kneels down and inspects the wire) I can't believe it. This booby trap must be centuries old, and it still works.
Aang: There's probably a lot more. Maybe this means we shouldn't be here.

(Zuko takes a step back and starts to run on a wall and lands in front of Aang.)

Zuko: (dusting himself) Where's that upbeat attitude you were talking about? Besides, people don't make traps unless they've got something worth protecting.

(Camera slowly pans upwards to a rather grand and elaborate structure that seems to be intact. Cut to Zuko and Aang making it to the top of the structure.)

Aang: Look. This seems promising. (Camera zooms out to reveal a carving of a person in the middle being surrounded by concentric circles of fire breathed out by 2 dragons on each side of him.) Though I'm not sure what this tells us about the original source of firebending.
Zuko: They look pretty angry to me. (Cut to a close-up of the carving)
Aang: I thought the dragons were friends with the Sun Warriors.
Zuko: Well, they had a funny way of showing it.(he looks away and takes a few steps before he's interrupted by Aang)
Aang: Zuko, something happened to the dragons in the last 100 years. Something you're not telling me.
Zuko: My great-grandfather Sozin happened.

(Cut to the boys walking across a stone bridge with dragon protrusions at the side.)

Zuko: He started the tradition of hunting dragons for glory. They were the ultimate firebenders. And if you could conquer one, your firebending talents
would become legendary, and you'd earn the honorary title "Dragon". (They reach the end of the bridge. They're 2 dragon statues at the end. One of the statues is missing a head.) The last great dragon was conquered long before I was born, (Cut to the dragon statue's eye and Zuko pats the eye of the decapitated head) by my Uncle.
Aang: But I thought your Uncle was, I don't know, good?
Zuko: He had a complicated past. Family tradition, I guess. Let's just move on.

(Camera zooms out to show the distance between the dragon statue's head and its neck. Fade out to a column with a red jewel embedded in the centre. The column is positioned in front of a structure with 2 yellow doors. Zuko and Aang walk towards the doors. Aang walks towards them, drops his staff and attempts to open them with his bare hands to no avail.)

Aang: It's locked up.

(Zuko touches his head, looks behind and steps aside to reveal the red jewel from the column beaming light on his head.)

Zuko: Wait. (He steps aside to reveal the beam of red light resting on a circle on the ground) It's a celestial calendar. Just like the Fire Sages have in their temples. I bet that Sun Stone opens the door, but only when sunlight hits it at just the right angle, on the solstice. (Camera cuts to a red stone on the door)
Aang: (exasperated) Monkey feathers! The solstice again? We can't wait here that long.
Zuko: No we can't. (unsheathes his broadsword and lays it in the path of the red beam.) But we might be able to speed time up. Let's see if we can outsmart the Sun Stone.

(He attempts to adjust his sword. The beam of light is seen moving shakily across the doors and successfully hits the Sun Stone. It glows brightly.)

Aang: Nothing's happening.
Zuko: (Cut back to Zuko who is holding his sword in place) Come on...

(The screen starts to shake and the camera cuts to the area behind the door. The rumbling stops and the door opens to reveal Aang standing in front of it.)

Aang: (picking up his staff) You know, Zuko, I don't care (Zuko sheathes his sword) what everyone else says about you, (nudges him) you're pretty smart.

(Zuko smiles. Aang walks in and squints his eyes. Camera suddenly cuts to a statue with an angry face. Cut back to Aang who gasps in surprise.)

Zuko: Relax. They're just statues.

(Camera zooms up to reveal a ring of statues in various fighting positions. Camera gives a top view of the room. The positions of one half of the ring of statues is symmetrical to the other half.)

Aang: (scratches his head and reads the description at the foot of the statue) It says this is something called The Dancing Dragon.

(He lays his staff against the statue, takes a step-back and imitates the crane-posture of the statue. A plate sinks under his feet as he does so. Aang takes a step off the plate to observe it and the plate moves back into position. He looks around at the remaining statues.)

Aang: (runs and grabs Zuko by his elbow) Zuko, get over here. I
want you to dance with me. (tries to pull Zuko along)
Zuko: (he pulls back his arm in shock) What?
Aang: Just do it. (grabs and drags him away)

(Cut to the backview of the boys, they're standing behind the statues. Zuko groans)

Aang: Let's follow the steps of the statues.

(Both of them step on the first plate and move on to the next. Cut to Zuko's boot stepping on the second plate. He looks surprised.)

Aang: Don't you see? (Camera cuts to the top-view of the room) These aren't dance moves. These statues are giving us a lesson. (both of them move in synchronization as he speaks) I think this is some kind of Sun
Warrior firebending form. (Cut to Zuko moving along the line of statues and the camera shows his feet moving from plate to plate)
Zuko: (Zuko gets into punching position and move into another position with his arms spread in a low arc above his shoulders.) This better teach us some really good firebending.

(Cut to Aang who is doing the same 2 moves. He gets into a position with his arms stretched forward. Cut to Aang bending his torso to the right with his fists out-stretch and Zuko doing a mirror image. A sound echoes in the room and a hole appears in the centre of the room and both turn to look at it. A pedestal with a golden egg-like object ascends from the hole and glints in the light.)

Aang: (raises both arms in victory) Hurray! Wait. (rubs his head)What exactly is that?
Zuko: It's some kind of mystical gem stone. (runs towards the pedestal)
Aang: Well, don't touch it! (raises his arms as a warning and Zuko stops in his tracks)
Zuko: Why not?
Aang: Remember what happened out there with those spikes (looks at the side and raises his arms) I'm just very suspicious of giant, glowing gems sitting on pedestals.

(Zuko ignores him and removes the gem stone off the pedestal. Aang's eyebrow twitches.)

Zuko: It feels almost alive.

(He tries to put back the gem stone and yells in surprise as a jet of green goo spurts out from the pedestal and pushes Zuko towards the grating in the ceiling, sticking him there.)

Aang: (looks at the door closing) Oh, no, it's another trap!

(More green goo starts to flow from the pedestal and Aang backs away cautiously. Cut to Zuko who has his back stuck to the grating and struggles to break free but he and the gemstone are held tight by the goo.)

Zuko: Ugh, I can't pull free. It's like some kind of glue. (struggles again)

(Aang jumps across the goo to grab his staff on the other side of the room. He jumps up on the statue's head and airbends a strong gust of wind toward Zuko in an attempt to free him. The force from the wind only pushes moves Zuko from his back to his front but he is still stuck. The goo is rapidly rising and Aang tries to pull his staff out of the goo to no avail. He jumps up toward the grating as the goo rapidly engulfs the room.)

Aang: (tries to budge the metal bars) I can't move. Zuko, do something!
Zuko: Me? I can't move either.

(Cut to the camera inside the room and showing that the goo is nearing both boys. Cut to the top of the grating where they groan in discomfort as a result from the pressure of the goo pushing them against the grating. The goo suddenly stops pressing against them.)

Aang: It stopped.
Zuko: At least we have air. Maybe if we stay calm we can figure a way out of this.

(Camera cuts to the top view of the grating and slowly zooms out. Fade to night at the ruins. Cut to both boys who are still in the same position few hours earlier.)

Aang: You had to pick up the glowing egg, didn't you?
Zuko: At least I made something happen. If it were up to you, we'd never
have made it pass the courtyard.
Aang: (opens his mouth widely) Help!
Zuko: Who are you yelling to? Nobody's lived here for centuries.
Aang: Well, what do you think we should do?
Zuko: Think about our place in the Universe?

(Cut to the side of the grating. Aang sighs. A foot wearing a sandal steps into screen.)

Sun Warrior Chief: Who is down there?

(Cut to the boys' point of view as they see a man in tribal gear wearing a Chieftian's hat and warpaint on his face. Cut to a close-up shot of the man. Cut to both boys who are shocked by a presence of a person in the supposedly abandoned ruins. Cut to a shot of the structure where the gem-stone room was. Cut to Zuko and Aang who are freed but still covered in goo. Anteater-like animals sit on either side of them and lick the goo off. Camera cuts to the top view of the screen. They are surrounded by concentric semi-circles of men and women wearing gear identical to the Chief's. 4 warriors can be seen holding a small flame in their hands.)

Sun Warrior Chief: For trying to take our Sun Stone, you must be severely punished!
Zuko: (Cut to Zuko who still has a small spot of goo on his chin) We didn't come here to take your Sun Stone. We came here to find the ancient origin of all firebending.
Ham Gao:(Cut back to the top view and a man beside the Chief steps forward) Yeah, right. They are obviously thieves, here to steal Sun Warrior treasures. (Cut to a close-up shot of him as he holds the Sun stone tightly in his arms.)
Aang: Please, I don't normally play this card, but... (looking confident and places a hand on his chest) I'm the Avatar.

(Cut to the Ham Gao looking towards the Chief, puzzled. Aang stands up and gives a weak smile.)

Aang: Just hear us out.
Zuko: My name is Zuko, Crown Prince of the Fire Nation. Or at least, I
used to be. I know my people have distorted the ways of firebending, (camera pans across the group of warriors) to be fueled by anger and rage. But now I want to learn the true way, (cut back to Zuko who looks remorseful) the original way. When we came here, I never imagined (camera zooms out to show the group of warriors surrounding the trespassers) the Sun Warrior civilization was secretly alive. I am truly humbled to be in your presence. (Cut back to Zuko again) Please, teach us. (he and Aang bow their heads down in respect)
Sun Warrior Chief: (cut to the Chief's face, the camera slowly zooms in) If you wish to learn the ways of the Sun, you must learn them from the masters Ran and Shao.
Aang: Ran and Shao? There are two of them?
Sun Warrior Chief: (steps in front of them) When you present yourselves to them, they will examine you. They'll read your hearts, your souls, and your ancestry. (takes a step towards Zuko and towers over him) If they deem you worthy, (cut to Zuko who looks extremely worried) they'll teach you. If they don't, (camera zooms back slowly on the Chief's face) you'll be destroyed on the spot. (The Chief steps back after finishing his lecture. Aang and Zuko look at each other

Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(Scene opens up the next day with a shot towards the main structure.)

Sun Warrior Chief: (off screen) If you're going to see the masters, (camera zooms in on a fire at the top most dome. Cut to an overhead shot of the warriors standing in concentric semi-circles again. Zuko and Aang are right in front and the Chief appears to be standing in front of a fire source.) you must bring them a piece of the eternal flame. (camera cuts to the back of the Chief. The eternal flame is burning fiercely.) This fire is the very first one.(raises his arms in pride and turns back towards the duo) It was given to Man by the dragons. We have kept it going for thousands of years.
Zuko: (bewildered) I don't believe it.
Sun Warrior Chief: You will each take a piece of it to the masters, (camera pans around the fire source, the warriors are seated around the flame) to show your commitment to the sacred art of firebending.
Aang: (unsure) Um, Mister Sun Chief, sir? Yeah... I'm not a firebender yet. Couldn't my friend here carry my fire for me?
Sun Warrior Chief: (sternly) No. (turns back to the fire.)

(Cut to Aang who looks rather uneasy. Cut to the Chief's hand and he "pulls" the fire towards his palms.)

Sun Warrior Chief: This ritual illustrates the essence of Sun Warrior
philosophy.(turns a full circle and splits the fire equally in to two.)
You must maintain a constant heat. (cut to Aang who stares at the flame, transfixed.) The flame will go out if you make it too small. (Aang cringes) Make it too big, and you might lose control. (cut to Zuko who is staring coolly at the flame and proceeds to cradle the flame in his hands. He looks at Aang.)

(Cut to a side-view of Aang who still hasn't collected his flame.)

Aang: I'm sorry. I'm just a little nervous. (he proceeds to gather it into his hands. The fire grows slightly and he looks relieved and in awe.) It's like a little heartbeat.
Sun Warrior Chief: Fire is life, not just destruction. (cut to Aang who reassures himself with a smile). You will take your flames up there. (The Chief points to a rocky mountain nearby and the boys turn their heads toward that direction) The cave of the masters is beneath that rock. (Camera slowly zooms in on the mountain)

(Camera fades in to reveal the duo trudging through a forest. Fade in to another shot of a steep grassy incline. Fade to Zuko who has reached the top of the incline and turns back to Aang who is lagging quite a distance behind.)

Zuko: Hurry up.
Aang: I can't.(Places one hand on the rock) If I walk too fast, my
flame will go out. (looks back at his rather small flame)
Zuko: Your flame's gonna go out because it's too small. You're too timid. Give it more juice.
Aang: (climbs up and looks worriedly at Zuko) But what if I can't control it?
Zuko: You can do it. I know you can. You're a talented kid.

(Camera cuts to Aang who smiles. He pushes himself up and continues to follow Zuko. Camera zooms in slowly towards the mountain.

Fade to dusk and Zuko and Aang have just arrived at their destination. The warriors are already there and are poised in an alternating standing and sitting position. Camera zooms up to show the U-shaped rock with a bridge in the centre.)

Sun Warrior Chief: (walks towards them) Facing the judgment of the
firebending masters will be very dangerous for you. Your ancestors (cut to Zuko's face) are directly responsible for the dragons' disappearances.(Zuko looks towards the side in shame) The masters might not be so happy to see you.
Ham Gao: (places his hand on his hip, trying to intimidate Zuko) I know I wouldn't be.
Aang: (interrupts) But once they find out I'm the Avatar...
Sun Warrior Chief: Have you forgotten that you vanished allowing the Fire
Nation to wreak havoc on the world? The decline of the dragons is your burden too. (cut to Aang who also turns his head away)

(The Chief drives his staff into the ground and Sun warriors get into a "ready" position at either side of the staff. It is noted that both warriors are mirror image of each other. The Chief grabs a section from each flame and places it on the Sun Warriors' palms. They move away and the Chief removes his staff. Cut to a warrior who receives a flame and bends it around in a circle a few times before the next warrior who is standing bends a small part of the flame towards her and repeats the process.)

Aang: We could turn back now. We've already learned more about fire than we hoped. (shows Zuko that he can handle his fire and gives a weak smile)
Zuko: No, we're seeing this through to the end. We're gonna meet these masters and find out what's so great about them.
Aang: What if they judge us and attack us?
Zuko: Well, we're the Fire Prince and the Avatar. (unsheathes his broadswords slightly to emphasize his point and smiles) I think we can take these guys in a fight, whoever they are. (Cut to Aang who nods but is still uneasy.)

(Camera zooms out to reveal the warriors completing the passing of the flame.)

Zuko: (he steps forward with confidence) Bring 'em out.
Sun Warrior Chief: (opens his hand to the side) Chanters!

(Music from the ending credits of the show play and the warriors who are sitting down beat in synchronized rhythm on their drums. Cut to the warriors holding the circle of flame remaining in their positions. Zuko and Aang's footwear walk into screen. Cut to the other half of the circle and the warriors are rising and bowing alternatively. Cut to the boys who are nearing the steps. Cut to a shot of the flight of steps. The Chief and the 2 warriors step aside to let them pass.

Zuko and Aang glance at each other and both take a deep breath before ascending. Cut to the warriors who are still beating the drums. Cut to Zuko and Aang climbing the steps. Aang looks back, seemingly wanting to go back but he presses forward with a "I've got no choice" look on his face. Cut to the side of the stairs to show that they're halfway there. Cut to the Chief looking at their progress at the bottom. Cut to Zuko and Aang who are nearing the top with the setting Sun shining upon them in the background. The music stops when they reach the top. Both of them look at the caves on each side of the bridge.)

Sun Warrior: (using a megaphone-like object to amplify his voice) Those who wish to meet the masters Ran and Shao will now present their fire.

(Aang and Zuko turn towards the caves and bow down with their hands extended in front of them. Camera zooms out to show them being silhouetted by the setting Sun.)

Sun Warrior Chief: (off-screen) Sound the call.

(A warrior takes a deep breath and blows into a wind instrument. The loud sound it produces sends a flock of birds scattering in the background. The cave Aang is facing rumbles and vibrates as the rocks dislodge. He trembles in fear. Aang accidentally places his hand down, extinguishing his flame and turns towards Zuko.)

Aang: What's happening?

(He looks at Zuko's cave which remains undisturbed. Zuko turns and gives Aang a puzzled look. Aang quickly returns back into his "flame-giving" position. He realized that his flame is gone and gasps, turning back towards Zuko again.)

Aang: (whispers) Zuko, my fire went out.
Zuko: (whispers back) What do you want me to do?
Aang: Give me some of yours. (He reaches for Zuko's fire and Zuko gently pushes him back)
Zuko: No, just make your own.
Aang: I can't. (reaches for Zuko's flame)
Zuko: Get some from one of those warriors. (camera zooms out to gives a top view of what's happening. It seems like his whispers can be heard from the bottom) Hurry. Stop cheating off me! (his voice is raised and camera cuts back to the Chief who has seemed to have heard the commotion and exchanges looks with another warrior)
Aang: (irritated) Quit being stingy!

(Aang continues to reach for Zuko's flame but is unable to do so due to the
differences between their heights. Zuko raises his arms higher so the flame remains out of Aang's reach and Aang tries to grab it by sticking close to Zuko's back and flailing his arms. He uses two hands to grab the flame from under Zuko's armpits and they struggle briefly before Zuko drops his hand, extinguishing the flame. They look at each other, unsure.

Cut to the camera inside one of the caves and the screen shakes at the cave rumbles. Zoom in onto the boys who look troubled. They turn their heads towards the other cave and the camera zooms in on the black emptiness within.)

Aang and Zuko: Uh-oh.

(A pair of yellow eyes glow in the dark and suddenly, a red dragon roars and shoots out of the cave. It circles around the bridge and the duo. Cut to the boys who are overwhelmed by the powerful winds and pressure and stagger slightly. Cut to Zuko who looks shocked and follows the dragon's trail.

Cut to a blue dragon flying out of the other cave and joins its partner in circling around each other, the bridge and boys.)

Zuko: These are the masters.
Aang: (whispers) You still think we can take 'em?
Zuko: Shh. I never said that.

(Zoom out to the bottom of the bridge where the dragons are still circling in the air and generating powerful winds. Camera slowly pans down to the warriors and all of them bow down. Cut to Ham Gao and the Chief.)

Ham Gao: Oh, here it comes. (looks up at the boys) Any moment now... dinner for the masters.
Sun Warrior Chief: (turns his head towards Ham Gao and chides) Quiet, Ham Gao.
Ham Gao: What? (sulks and turns his head away) Everyone's thinking it.

(Cut to the bridge where the dragons are still flying in an elaborate formation of turns, twists and curves. Cut to Aang who is deep in thought.)

Aang: (whispers) Zuko, I think we're supposed to do The Dragon Dance with them.
Zuko: What? What about this situation that you think they want us to dance?
Aang: Well, I think they want us to do something. Let's just try it.
Zuko: Fine.

(They get into the first position of The Dragon Dance and proceed to the next. Cut to Aang spreading his arms out and the blue dragon behind him following the shape of his arms. Aang turns his arms to his side and the dragon turns as well. Camera zooms out to show that the dragons are performing the same movements and are symmetrical to one another.

Cut to Zuko who pushes his hand up and the red dragon behind him angles upwards as well. Zuko dips and the dragon dives down as well. Zoom out to show the boys slowly heading towards on another and the dragons complementing their movements. Finally, the camera zooms in on them as they get into their final pose. Camera zooms out to show the dragons have stopped and are flapping their wings on either side of the bridge.)

Sun Warrior Chief: Judgment time.

(Cut to the blue dragon which snarles at Zuko. Aang is visibly trembling. Zuko looks at it, mouth agape. Aang gives out a series of timid, unsure shrieks. Camera zooms out to give a side view of the bridge and the 2 dragons settle into another position with their legs being anchored at the bottom of the bridge and their arms supporting their weight at the top. Cut to the red dragon and it beings to breathe fire out of its mouth. Cut to the blue dragon which does the same. Cut to Zuko and Aang who yell in fear as they are engulfed by a rapidly rising multi-colored flame.

Cut to the camera looking up the eye of the vortex. It slowly pans down to the boys who remain in their positions, shell-shocked at the sight. Cut to the side of the bridge where the dragons have angled their mouths up, fire still being breathed out. Camera pans up to the swirling vortex of rainbow flames. Cut to the inside of the vortex and the duo stare at the scene in wonder. Cut to Aang's eyes and an orange color reflects off his pupils and he gasps in amazement.)

Zuko:(realization) I understand.

(The flame slowly dissipates and the dragons curl their bodies, spring up and circle each other one final time before they retreat to their caves. Cut to the boys who still remain on the bridge. Cut to Ham Gao who looks annoyed that nothing has happened to them. Cut to one of the warriors holding the circle of fire as he moves his arm in a circle, extinguishing the flame and ending his hands in a position demonstrated by Ms Kwan in "The Headband". Cut to the top view of the scene, Zuko and Aang can be seen as tiny figures slowly descending on the steps.)

Zuko: Their fire was beautiful. I saw so many colors, colors I've never imagined.
Aang: Like firebending harmony.
Sun Warrior Chief: Yes. They judged you, and gave you visions of the meaning of firebending.
Zuko: I can't believe there are still living dragons. My Uncle Iroh said he faced the last dragon and killed it.
Aang: So, your Uncle lied.
Sun Warrior Chief: Actually, (Cut to the Chief who is smiling) it wasn't a total lie. Iroh was the last outsider to face the masters. They deemed him worthy and passed the secret onto him as well. (Zuko's eyes widen in surprise)
Zuko: He must have lied to protect them, so no one else would hunt them.
Aang: All this time, I thought firebending was destruction. Since I hurt
Katara, I've been too afraid and hesitant. But now I know what it really is... it's energy, and life.
Zuko: Yeah. It's like the Sun, (his hand curls into a fist) but inside of you. Do you guys realize this? (extends both arms outward)
Sun Warrior Chief: Well, our civilization is called the Sun Warriors... so yeah.
Zuko: That's why my firebending was so weak before. Because for so many
years, hunting you (turns towards Aang) was my drive... it was my purpose. So when I joined you, I lost sight of my inner fire. But now, I have a new drive. I have to help you (camera zooms in towards Zuko's determined face) defeat my father and restore balance to the world.

(Zuko firebends twice with a rather large sized flame. Aang follows his example and bends. His flame is large as well. Camera cuts to Aang's face as he finally conquers his fears. Cut to both of them who walk towards each other, happy at their achievement.)

Sun Warrior Chief: Now that you have learned the secrets, and you know about our tribe's existence, (his face suddenly turns serious) we have no choice but to imprison you here forever. (cut to the boys who open their mouths in shock. Cut back to the Chief who smiles) Just kidding. (The duo's postures relax) But seriously, (looks serious) don't tell anyone!

(Camera cuts back to the upside down pagodas in the Western Air Temple)

Aang:(off-screen) With this technique the dragons showed us, Zuko and I would be unstoppable. (cut to Zuko and Aang who are demonstrating The Dragon Dance and they're firebending at each step. They get into their final pose and the group applauds.)

Sokka: Yeah, that's a great dance you two learned there.
Zuko: (defensive) It's not a dance. It's a firebending form.
Sokka: We'll just tap-dance (moves his fingers in a dancing motion) our way to victory over the Fire Lord.
Zuko: (walks towards Sokka) It's a sacred form that happens to be thousands of years old!
Katara: Oh yeah? What's your little form called?
Zuko: (embarrassed) The Dancing Dragon.

(The group laughs. Cut back to Zuko's face as he tries to still his temper and releases it as a shrug. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence, including clips from "The Day of Black Sun, Part 2: The Eclipse".]



Act I

(The episode opens up to night time at the Western Air Temple.)

Zuko: (Cut to a tray full of tea cups with Zuko's hand holding a kettle and filling up the empty cups) No one can make tea like Uncle. (Camera pans up to Zuko's face) But hopefully I learned a thing or two. Would you like to hear Uncle's favorite tea joke?
Katara: Sure. (Cut to an overhead of the group sitting around a fire)
Aang: I like jokes.
Toph: Bring it. (Zuko stands up with his tray)
Zuko: Okay. (Cut to Zuko kneeling between The Duke and Haru) Well, I can't remember how it starts but the punch line (the boys help themselves to the tea) is, "Leaf me alone, I'm bushed." (They give a dead panned look. Cut to show the rest of the group giving Zuko the same look as well) Well, it's funnier when Uncle tells it.
Katara: Right. Maybe that's because he remembers (grabs a cup) the whole thing.

(Aang laughs and helps himself to a cup. Cut to show the group laughing as well. Cut back to Zuko who smiles.)

Toph: It's nice to get a chance to relax a little. (Zuko walks between Toph and Teo and hands them their drinks.) It hardly ever happens. (They proceed to drink their tea)
Sokka: (Cut to Sokka who is sitting by himself at the side, thinking) Hey, can I talk to you for a second?

(He gets up and walks away. Zuko places his tray down and follows. They walk to the area where Appa is resting.)

Zuko: So (Appa wakes up and looks at them) what's up?
Sokka: (Cut to the side view of the area as they continue to walk further into the dark) If someone was captured by the Fire Nation, where would they be taken?
Zuko: What do you mean? Who was captured?
Sokka: When the invasion plan failed, some of our troops were taken. I just want to know where (gestures both hands out) they might be.
Zuko: I can't tell you.
Sokka: What? Why not?
Zuko: Trust me. Knowing would just make you feel worse. (He turns around and Sokka grabs his shoulder)
Sokka: It's my Dad. He was captured too. I need to know what I put him
through.
Zuko: It's not good Sokka.
Sokka: Please.
Zuko: (closes his eyes) My guess is... (opens his eyes) They were taken to the Boiling Rock.
Sokka: (frowns slightly) What's that?
Zuko: (off screen) The highest security prison in the Fire Nation. (Sokka's mouth goes slightly agape) It's on an island in the middle of a boiling lake. (Sokka turns towards the camera, folds his arms and looks serious) It's inescapable.
Sokka: So where is this place?
Zuko: Why do you need to know? What are you planning?
Sokka: Nothing. Boy, you're so paranoid. (waves his arm dismissively)
Zuko: (warily) It's in the middle of a volcano between here and the Fire Nation. You guys actually flew right past it on your way here.
Sokka: Thanks Zuko. (yawns and pats Zuko's shoulder as he walks past) Just knowing makes me feel better.
Zuko: Yeah, I'm sure it does.

(Cut to an area behind both of them as they walk back to the fire. Camera fades to show Aang snoring in his sleep. A boot walking tip-toed comes into screen. Cut to show Katara sleeping in her sleeping bag. Camera zooms out to show the others are asleep as well as Sokka silently walks towards Appa with his belongings. Cut to Sokka as he lets out a sigh after successfully not waking anyone. He turns as the music lets out a surprised tune. His eyes widen. Camera pans down to show that he nearly tripped over a sleeping Momo. He walks over him and patters his way towards Appa.

He starts to climb up as Appa wakens. Sokka shushs him and Appa goes back to sleep. Cut to an overhead view of Sokka as he ascends. Cut to his hand reaching the saddle and pulling himself up to reveal Zuko already waiting for him.)

Zuko: Not up to anything, huh?

(Sokka yelps in shock and loses his grip ashe falls down on the hard stone floor with a loud thud and groan.)

Sokka: Fine, you caught me. I'm gonna rescue my Dad. (puts back his belongings back into his bag) You happy now?
Zuko: I'm never happy.
Sokka: Look, I have to do this. The invasion plan was my idea. It was my decision to stay when things were going wrong. (Cut to a side view of Sokka walking towards Appa as Zuko jumps off the bison) It's my mistake and it's my job to fix it. (Cut back to Sokka who looks determined) I have to regain my honor. You can't stop me Zuko.
Zuko: You need to regain your honor? Believe me, I get it. I'm going with you.
Sokka: (Sokka climbs up near the saddle) No. I have to do this alone.
Zuko: How are you going to get there? On Appa? Last time I checked, (Cut to a back view of Sokka) prisons don't have bison day cares.

(Sokka touches the saddle before he sighs and looks at Zuko.)

Zuko: We'll take my war balloon.

(Sokka jumps off. Cut to show both boys walking off screen as Momo and Appa continue to slumber. Time quickens and shows the same scene again but it's already morning at the temple. The Duke walks into screen with an armful of hay as he throws it into Appa's mouth. Katara walks into screen as well. Cut to Momo sleeping on his back with a piece of crumpled paper in his arm like a blanket. Katara's gloved hand retrieves it.

Cut toToph and Aang who sleepily rubs his eyes as they walk to Katara's side.)

Toph: What does it say?
Katara: Need meat. Gone fishing. (Turns the paper and her head as she tries to decipher the handwriting) Back in a few days. (Aang turns around and yawns.) Sokka and Zuko. One more thing. (Cut to an area in Aang's sleeping bag as he walks back) Aang, practice your firebending while I'm gone. Do twenty sets of fire fists and ten hot squats every time you hear a badger frog croak. (Aang lies down and proceeds to go back to sleep) Zuko.

(A badger frog croaks and Aang opens his eyes with irritation and stands up.)

Aang: Nobody else has homework. (Cut to an overhead view of Aang as he proceeds to squat with his hands behind his head) One hot squat. Two hot squat. Three hot squat. Four hot...

(Cut to an area full of clouds as Zuko's war balloon appears from behind them. Cut to show the burner's flame. It grows bigger for a while before going back to its normal size. Cut to a side view of Zuko to show him firebending into the fuel tank with one hand and Sokka resting in the background. They look at each other. Zuko firebends again. They stare at each other again before looking away in awkward silence.)

Sokka: (looks up) Pretty clouds.
Zuko: (raises head) Yeah, fluffy.

(Cut to show a full side view of the war balloon as it sails through the air. A whistle pierces the silence. Cut back to inside the basket to show Sokka was the source of the whistle.)

Zuko: (turns towards Sokka) What?
Sokka: What? Oh, I didn't say anything. You know, a friend of mine actually designed these war balloons.
Zuko: No kidding.
Sokka: Yep. A balloon. But for War.
Zuko: There's one thing my Dad's good at, (turns back to the tank and firebends) it's War.
Sokka: (nonchalantly) Yeah, it seems to run in the family.
Zuko: Hey, hold on. Not everyone in my family is like that.
Sokka: I know, I know, you've changed.
Zuko: I meant my Uncle. He was more of a Father (Cut to Zuko who looks saddened) to me. And I really let him down.
Sokka: (emphatically) I think your Uncle would be proud of you. Leaving your home to come help us, that's hard.
Zuko: It wasn't that hard.
Sokka: (Cut to a side view of the basket) Really? You didn't leave behind anyone you cared about?
Zuko: Well I did have a girlfriend. Mai.
Sokka: (He goes closer to Zuko with a surprised look on his face) That gloomy girl who sighs a lot?
Zuko: (Cut back to show Zuko grinning goofily) Yeah. (his face turns serious) Everyone in the Fire Nation thinks I'm a traitor. I couldn't drag her into it.
Sokka: (Cut back to Sokka who leans back on the basket) My first girlfriend turned into the Moon.
Zuko: (looks up) That's rough buddy.

(Scene changes to night as the war balloon is still sailing in the sky. Cut to an overhead shot of Sokka who is snoring with his mouth open. Cut to the inside of the tank as Zuko firebends into it. Cut to the outside as Zuko closes the door and wipes his hands. He leans on the basket and spots something.)

Zuko: There it is.

(Sokka awakens instantly. Cut an area behind the balloon to show them nearing a volcano-like area with steam coming out from it.)

Zuko: There's plenty of steam to keep us covered. As long as we're quiet we should be able to navigate through it without being caught.

(Cut to an overhead view of the steaming crater. Cut to the fuel tank's door opening and Zuko's hand appearing into screen, firebending into it. Cut to the burner as it flames weakly. Cut to show the war balloon slowly descending into the crater. Cut to the inside of the basket as Sokka looks down at the steaming water.

Cut back to the burner again as it begins to lose its power. Cut to an outer view of the war balloon as it rapidly goes down into the crater. Cut to an overhead view of the balloon getting lost through the sea of steam.

(Cut back into the basket as Zuko rapidly firebends into the tank.)

Zuko: We're going down. The balloon's not working anymore!

(Sokka appears frantic as he rushes to the other side of the basket.

Cut an area inside the vent looking down at the tank of fire and Zuko who decides to firebend into the vent instead.)

Sokka: The air outside is just as hot as the air inside so we can't fly.

(Cut to show the war balloon continuing its descend. Cut back into the basket as it slants and Zuko loses his balance.)

Zuko: So what are we supposed to do?
Sokka: (Cut back to Sokka who grabs onto the tank) I don't know. Crash landing?

(Cut to show the war balloon dangerously near the water. Cut to show the basket touching the surface of the water. Cut back to Sokka as the water splashes onto his hand. Sokka flails his hand as he covers his mouth and struggles not to scream. Cut to a side view of the balloon as it glides on the water and crashes onto land, shattering the basket into pieces.

Cut to the ground as both guys get thrown into screen with their belongings. Cut to show the vent slowly deflating onto the broken strips of wood and metal. Zuko and Sokka gets up as he spurts out the stuff in his mouth. Both of them slowly turn towards the carnage.)

Zuko: How are we gonna get off the island if the balloon won't work?
Sokka: We'll figure something out. I suspected it might be a one-way ticket.
Zuko: (looks at Sokka as he walks away) You knew this would happen and you wanted to come anyway?
Sokka: (Cut to a back view of Sokka walking towards the fallen vent) My Dad might be here. I had to come and see.
Zuko: Uncle always said (Sokka proceeds to gather more of the vent and places them into the broken basket) I never thought things through, but this, ugh, (grabs his head) this is just crazy. (Cut to a front shot of Zuko as he throws out both arms)
Sokka: (Cut to an area inside the basket as Sokka turns back to Zuko) Hey! I never wanted you to come along in the first place. And for the record, (throws the fallen cloth into the basket) I always think things through. But my plans haven't exactly worked, so this time I'm playing it by ear. So there.

(He pushes the basket but yelps as his hand automatically withdraws since the basket scorches him. He proceeds to kick it. Cut to a side view of the broken balloon as it slowly sinks into the water)

Zuko: What are you doing?
Sokka: It doesn't work anyway. (Cut to an area behind their heads as both of them look at the vent slowly going underwater) And we don't want anyone to find it.
Zuko: I hope you know what you're doing. (Both of them turn around) There's no turning back now.

(Cut to show a huge metal building hidden behind the steam. Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(Scene returns back to the metal building the next day. Cut to a dark room with lights only illuminating the shelves full of helmets, shoulder pads and boots. The door closes as the light diminishes. Cut to the outside of the door to show 2 guys in prison guard uniform closing the door.)

Zuko: I hope these disguises work.
Sokka: We just need to lay low and find my Dad as soon as possible.

(The corridor is suddenly filled with running guards. Sokka and Zuko grin nervously, hoping that they won't be noticed.)

Guard: (stopping at the opening of the corridor to address the 2 boys) Guards! There's a scuffle in the yard, come on.

(Cut to the corridor as Zuko and Sokka run behind the last of the group. Cut to the legs of the running guards to show them running towards a mass of people wearing red in the yard. Cut to an overhead view of the yard to show prisoners forming a circle around 2 people in the centre as they circle round each other.

Cut to show the guards shoving the spectating prisoners aside. Cut to the front shot of the prisoner in the centre as the guards attempt to form a barricade in front of the crowd.)

Chit Sang: I didn't do anything. I'm going back to my cell.

(He walks away. Cut to the ground looking up at Chit Sang and the guard as the guard firebends a whip and lashes it near Chit Sang's legs.)

Bully Guard: Stop right there Chit Sang.

(Cut to Zuko and Sokka as Zuko walks forward, trying to interfere. Cut to Sokka gripping onto Zuko's elbow)

Sokka: (whispers) We can't blow our cover. (Cut back to a front show of Chit Sang as the guard approaches him from behind)
Bully Guard: I've had it with your unruly behavior.
Chit Sang: (turns back to the guard) What did I do?
Bully Guard: (Cut to the guard) He wants to know what he did. (turns towards Zuko and Sokka) Isn't that cute? (He looks back at Chit Sang as the guys stare at him in silence. The guard senses something suspicious and raises his visor to inspect the boys.)

Zuko: (Sokka's eye looks toward Zuko nervously) Uh, yeah, very cute sir.
Sokka: Super cute.

(The guard smiles satisfactorily at their answers and walks back towards Chit Sang)

Bully Guard: You didn't bow down when I walked by Chit Sang.
Chit Sang: (outraged) What? That's not a prison rule.
Bully Guard: (Cut to an overhead shot of the guard staring up at Chit Sang) Do it.
Chit Sang: (Cut back to Chit Sang who protests defiantly) Make me.

(Camera slowly pans across the crowd looking at the commotion. Cut back to the guard as he smirks and walks away from Chit Sang. He then proceeds to firebend another whip. Cut to a side shot of the whip travelling towards Chit Sang. Cut to Chit Sang who turns around and firebends the whip and directs it back to the guard. Cut to the guard who kicks the flame aside.)

Bully Guard: (shakes head) Tsk, tsk. Firebending is prohibited. (Cut back to Chit Sang who still remains in his stance) You're going in the Cooler. (He drops his position. The Guard suddenly points to Sokka) You! Help me take him in.
Sokka: (whispers to Zuko) Meet back here in an hour.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the circle as 3 of them walk away from the crowd. Cut to the metal building as camera slowly zooms out. Cut to a close up shot of the bumps of the metal building which are the coolers. Cut into the corridor as Chit Sang is led to the cooler with 2 security doors. Sokka opens them and water vapour gushes out.)

Bully Guard: The Warden will deal with you soon.

(Cut to the inside of the cooler as Chit Sang gets shoved in. Cut back to outside of the cooler as Sokka closes the 2 doors.)

Bully Guard: Can you believe this guy?
Sokka: (gets into the act) Prisoners. Am I right?
Bully Guard: Ugh. Tell me about it.

(Cut to a door with a guard sitting outside on a bench with his helmet off, reading something. Cut to the inside of the lounge with 3 guards eating their meals with their helmets off as they laugh.)

Male Guard: (Camera zooms out to the buffet table as Zuko grabs his food) Hey new guy. I know it's the rule to have your helmet on at all times but this is the lounge. Relax.
Zuko: But what if there's an incident? If I'm not prepared someone could
strike me on the head. (He walks toward the table as the guards laugh)
Female Guard: Give it a week, he'll loosen up.
Zuko: (Sets his plate down and sits with them) Can the new guy ask you veterans a few questions about the prison?
Female Guard: (Cut to the guard) No, you can't date the female guards.
Male Guard: (Camera pans to the left to the male guard) Trust me, you don't want to. (A cup enters the screen and hits his head. The guard behind him laughs)
Zuko: (Cut to a side view of Zuko) No, that's not it. The Boiling Rock, it holds the Fire Nation's most dangerous criminals right? So what about war prisoners?

(Cut to the yard looking up at the gondola heading towards a tower. Cut to the inside of the tower as the gondola docks. The door opens and a man walks out as the others bow their heads down in respect. Cut to the ceiling of the cooler as it blows cold air in.

Camera pans down to show Chit Sang shivering and holding his legs close to his body for warmth. A shadow is seen peering into the cooler. Cut to a front shot of Chit Sang as he continues to shiver from the cold. Camera slowly zooms in on the person who is looking at Chit Sang. The blue eyes under the helmet hints that the person is Sokka.)

Sokka: It sure looks cold in there.
Bully Guard: That's why we call it the Cooler. (Cut back to Chit Sang who continues to shiver) He won't be firebending in there. (looks at the end of the corridor and suddenly pulls down his visor) It's the Warden. Look alive.

(They stand at attention at both sides of the door. Cut to a close up of the warden walking with a serious look on his face. Cut to the inside of the cooler as the door opens and the warden walks in.)

Warden: So Chit Sang, I hear you used firebending to try to escape. You should know better.
Chit Sang: (shivers and struggles to talk) I wasn't trying to escape.
Bully Guard: (off screen) He's lying. (Cut to show the bully guard looking in) I saw him with my own eyes. (The warden's guard pushes him away)
Warden: No one (Camera slowly zooms in on his face) has ever, ever escaped from here. I'd sooner jump in the boiling lake myself than let that record fall. (Cut to a close up shot of his eyes he furrows them) Don't forget it. Now (Cut to an overhead shot of the cooler as he turns away) go back to your shivering.

(Chit Sang looks at the warden as the door closes, leaving him in the dark. He shivers and lowers his head down.

Cut to the yard at the bottom of the gondola tower. Cut to another part of the yard to show the prisoners roaming about. There's a fire nation insignia stenciled in middle of the yard. Camera pans to the left to show a guard leaning on the railing of a tower, looking down. Another guard joins him.)

Zuko: Hey there, fellow guard. How goes it?
Sokka: (raises his visor) Zuko?
Zuko: (raises his finger to his mouth) Shh. Listen, I asked around the lounge. There are no (makes the gesture with his hands) Water
Tribe prisoners. (raises his visor) I'm afraid your Father's not here.
Sokka: (Cut back to Sokka who is in shock) What? Are you sure? Did you double check?
Zuko: (Cut back to Zuko) Yeah, I'm sure.
Sokka: (Cut to an area on the ground behind Zuko) No. (holds his head in despair as he walks towards a wall) No! (bangs his fist against the wall in frustration)
Zuko: I'm really sorry Sokka.
Sokka: So we came all this way for nothing. I failed. (leans on the wall) Again.
Zuko: Err, (holds his chin in thought) what would Uncle say? (He looks to the sky. Cut to an area at Zuko's feet looking up at him as he stares at the clouds) Sometimes clouds have two sides, a dark and light. And a silver lining in between. It's like a silver sandwich. So... (Cut back to Sokka who appears disinterested) when life seems hard... (Sokka looks to the side and his eyes widen) take a bite out of the silver sandwich. (Sokka smiles and rushes to the railing.)
Sokka: Maybe we haven't failed after all.
Zuko: That's the spirit. I can't believe (folds his arms) that worked. I didn't even know what I was saying.
Sokka: No, what you said made no sense at all. But look, (points) it's Suki! (Cut to show an overhead view of the yard. Camera zooms in rapidly on Suki who is sitting on a rock)
Guard: (off screen) Prisoners! (a bell rings through the yard as Suki gets up) Back in your cells!

(Cut to Sokka who comically has 2 heart shapes as his eyes and lowers his visor as he rushes off. Cut to the prisoners housing area. Camera slowly pans to show a guard mopping the floor and another one doing his rounds. Cut to Suki lying on her bed. The door to her cell opens, illuminating her face as her eyes looks to the door.)

Suki: (sits up and camera zooms out to show Sokka standing in front of her) What is it? (sits up straight on her bed, looking at him) Did I do something wrong?
Sokka: (crosses his arms) You mean you don't recognize me?
Suki: You people all look the same to me. (looks to the side)
Sokka: (Cut back to Sokka who looks on smugly) Oh. Then maybe you'll recognize this.

(He purses his lips and attempts smooching sounds. Suki grabs his chin. Cut to a side view of what's happening as Suki pushes him to the door. Cut to Sokka's back slamming the door as the helmet falls off his head . He looks surprised at the sudden violence.

Cut to Suki remaining in her stance as a look of relief washes over her face.)

Suki: Sokka, (runs to him) it's you.

(Cut to a side view of Sokka on the floor as Suki embraces him. Cut to a front shot of Sokka's face as he smiles and hugs back. Cut to Suki who is tearing.)

Sokka: (Cut to a side view of both of them standing up) The other
Kyoshi Warriors, are they here?
Suki: No, (looks worried) I don't know where they are. They locked me here because I'm the leader.
Sokka: Well, you (touches her face with one hand) won't be here for long, I'm busting you out.
Suki: (Cut to Suki) I'm so glad (holds on to Sokka's hand that is touching her face) to see you Sokka. I knew you'd come.

(Cut to a side view of them again as they lower their hands into a hug. They look in each other's eyes for a moment as they lean in for a kiss. Cut to Zuko who is standing outside the cell as he looks to the side. Camera zooms out to show a guard walking up the stairs. Zuko knocks on the door of Suki's cell to warn them. Cut to the inside of the cell as Sokka and Suki break apart from the kiss. Cut to an area behind the female guard as she approaches Suki's cell.)

Female Guard: 'Scuse me, I need to get into that cell.
Zuko: No, you can't go in there. (looks into the opening of the cell door) The lights are out... the prisoner (points to the door) could sneak up on you. (Cut to the female guard who frowns)
Female Guard: Step aside, fool. (She tries to push Zuko aside but he grabs her arm and throws her against the wall.) Hey! Hey! What are you doing?

(The female guard manoeuvres her way around and throws Zuko against the cell door. Cut to the inside of the cell as Suki and Sokka sit down against the door, looking up at the opening and hearing the commotion. Sokka puts on his helmet. Cut to show a boot stomping on the ground. Camera zooms out to show Zuko trying to balance himself as he attempts to push the female guard down. The door to Suki's cell opens and Sokka sneaks out. The female guard tries to elbow Zuko's chin. Cut to a close up side view of the female guard as she looks to the side at Sokka.)

Female Guard: Guard, (Camera zooms out to show Sokka trying to get away) help! (Sokka cringes) I think he's an imposter! (Cut to Sokka as he turns around) Argh! Arrest him!

(Camera slowly zooms in on Sokka with an unreadable expression on his face. Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(Scene returns to an overhead shot of the Boiling Rock with a gondola slowly gliding into the prison. Cut back to the female guard, still locked in the same position earlier.)

Female Guard: Get him off me and arrest him!

(Camera zooms out on the scene in the corridor and quickly cuts to Sokka who stares at the situation. He slowly walks forward and grabs Zuko's arm and throws him against the floor.)

Sokka: You're under arrest! (Helps Zuko to his feet and whispers) Don't worry, I'll figure it out.

(Sokka leads him away while the female guard massages her sore shoulder. Cut to an area in the water showing the building of coolers. Cut to Zuko's scarred side. He looks up as the door opens and light shines on his face. Cut to an area behind Zuko to reveal the warden standing at the doorway.)

Warden: Well, well, well. (Cut to the warden) I never thought I'd find you in here, Prince Zuko.
Zuko: (Cut back to Zuko's side view) How did you know who I am?
Warden: How could I not? (furrows his eyebrows) You broke my niece's heart. (Cut to a side view of the scene to show Zuko leaning dismissively against the wall.)
Zuko: (stands straight) You're Mai's uncle? (Cut to Zuko's guilty stricken face) I never meant to hurt her.
Warden: (Cut back to warden and the camera slowly zooms in on him) Quiet! You're my special prisoner now. And you best behave. If these criminals found out who you are, the traitor prince who let his nation down. Why, they'd tear you to shreds.
Zuko: So what's in it for you? Why don't you just tell my Father and collect the reward.
Warden: (darkly) Oh in due time believe me, I intend to collect.

(He walks out. Cut back to Zuko's face as the door closes and the room becomes dark again. Cut to the floor. 2 mops come into screen. Cut to a flight of stairs to show a guard descending and Zuko and Suki mopping the floor under the stairs.)

Sokka: (crosses arms) Oh, good. You guys have met.
Suki: (Camera zooms out to show Suki and Zuko doing their chores) A...actually, we met a long time ago.
Zuko: We did?
Suki: Yeah, you kind of burned down my village. (looks at Zuko angrily as Sokka puts his hand on his helmet in a "You shouldn't have said that" gesture)
Zuko: (looks up and thinks) Oh. Sorry about that. Nice to see you again. (They put their mops against the wall as they sit down. Sokka checks his surroundings before joining them)
Sokka: So listen, I think I have an escape plan. (faces the two and kneels while lifting his visor) I checked out the Coolers again, the whole point of them is to keep firebenders contained, right?
Zuko: Yeah...
Sokka: So they're completely insulated and sealed to keep the cold in. Well to keep the cold in it also has to keep the heat out, right?
Suki: Just get to the point Sokka.
Sokka: It's a perfect boat (he left arm moves across his body in a fluid motion) for getting through the boiling water.
Zuko: (Cut to Zuko and Suki who look at each other sceptically) The cooler as a boat? Are you sure?
Sokka: (Cut back to Sokka) I'm telling you, it'll work.

(Camera pans to the side quickly as it changes scene to Sokka walking around the perimeter of the Boiling Rock, near the water)

Sokka: (voice over) I walked around the perimeter. There's a blind spot (cut to Sokka's point of view as he looks up to see the guard tower slowly disappearing from sight from the area under the cooler building) between two guard towers. It's the perfect launching point. I already tested it out. (Cut to Sokka kneeling down. Cut to his hand letting go of a small boat made of paper) We'll roll the cooler into the water and just float with the current. (Sokka looks on as the boat sails with the current) It'll take us straight across. As long as we don't make a sound, (Cut back to present day Sokka) no one will notice. And bing, bang, boom we're home free.
Suki: But how are you going to get the cooler out?
Chit Sang: (off screen) Yeah, (Suki and Zuko are startled as they look up. The camera pans up to show Chit Sang eavesdropping on their conversation on the stairs) how are you going to get the cooler out? (He sails his body through an area underneath the railing and lands in a crouch near the group)
Sokka: (panics) What? (making various gestures) We didn't. We... We didn't say that. (waves arm dismissively)
Zuko: Yeah, you heard wrong.
Chit Sang: I heard you hatching an escape plan and I want in.
Zuko: There's nothing to get in on.
Sokka: Yeah, the only thing we're hatching is... an egg? (Zuko and Suki sigh at Sokka's lame attempt to hide the truth)
Chit Sang: Ok, well, I come with you or the Warden (Camera pans from Zuko to Suki who have serious looks on their faces) hears about this egg too.
Suki: (looks to Sokka) I guess we have no choice.
Sokka: Okay, you're in. Now, first we need someone (he reaches to his pocket) to unbolt the Cooler. (he hands a wrench over to Zuko) From the inside. (Zuko puts it into his pocket)
Chit Sang: (Cut to Chit Sang) Oh, I can get you inside.

(Cut to 2 guards leaning on a railing overlooking the mopping area and talking to each other. Cut to Chit Sang walking and stopping in front of the stairs with his arms crossed. Zuko walks backwards as he mops the floor and bumps the mop handle into Chit Sang.)

Chit Sang: Ugh. Hey, what are you, stupid (grabs onto Zuko's shoulders and Zuko does the same as well) Watch where you're going! (They push each other and Chit Sang lifts Zuko off the ground and throws him. Zuko lands with a turn and faces Chit Sang.)
Zuko: Hey, you watch who you're shoving. (he pushes Chit Sang)
Chit Sang: I think you mean whom I'm shoving.

(They grab each others hands as they pretend to struggle. The other prisoners gather round and begin to cheer. They push each other before Zuko breaks off and attempts to throw a punch at Chit Sang. Chit Sang grabs his fist and throws him to the ground.)

Sokka: (walks in and raises his voice) I need backup over here.

(Chit Sang attempts to body slam Zuko but Zuko somersaults out of the way. Cut to Zuko landing safely and proceeding to firebend. Cut to an area behind Chit Sang as he jumps to avoid the flames from scorching his feet.)

Guard: No firebending. (points) Into the cooler.

(Two guards immediately rush in to contain Zuko to the floor. They bring him up and lead him away. Cut to Suki and Sokka stealing a glance at each other before they part ways. Cut to the gondola towers as the camera slowly pans across. Cut to the cooler building. Cut to a hand sliding the 2 doors of the cooler open to reveal a figure huddling inside. Cut to the inside of the cooler as the camera looks at the guard.)

Sokka: I can take you back to your cell if you've learned your lesson.
Zuko: (lifts his head up and sighs a breath of fire) Yes, I have. Completely.

(Zuko shows the various bolts and nuts he unbolted.)

Sokka: (smiles and lifts his visor up as he whispers) I got Suki and Chit Sang out of their cells a few minutes ago. They'll be waiting for us at the shore.
Zuko: Someone's coming.

(Zuko pulls Sokka in and quickly slides the inner door closed.)

Male Guard: (Cut to 2 guards making their rounds around the cooler corridor) Yeah, new arrivals coming in at dawn.
Female Guard: Anybody interesting?
Male Guard: (Cut to the inside of the cooler as the door opens by an inch to listen in to the conversation) Nah, just the usual. Some robbers, (Cut to the outside of the door to show Sokka's blue eye looking at the guards warily) couple of traitors, some war prisoners. (Sokka looks to Zuko) Though I did hear there might be a pirate.
Female Guard: No foolin'.
Zuko: (Cut to a concerned Zuko) War prisoners. It could be your Father.
Sokka: I know. (looks away and closes his eyes)
Zuko: Well, what should (shrugs) we do? Are we going ahead with the plan or are we waiting another night?
Sokka: (shakes head) I don't know. (looks towards Zuko with tears in his eyes) Is it right for me to risk Suki's freedom? All of our
freedom on the slim chance that my dad is gonna show up?
Zuko: It's your call Sokka.

(Cut back to Sokka who struggles to make a decision. Cut to night at an area in the water looking up at the cooler building. Cut to Chit Sang and Suki who are waiting. They look up and camera pans up to show Zuko and Sokka using all of their body weight to stop the cooler from rolling down the slope rapidly and noisily. Both of them rush up to assist.)

Chit Sang: Took you guys long enough. This here's (Cut to show a girl waving at them and a guy waiting near the shore) my girl and my best buddy. They're coming too.
Sokka: (Cut back to Sokka who looks annoyed and struggling against the weight of the cooler) Fine, everybody in the cooler. Let's go.

( They turn the cooler into a vertical position. Cut to a shadow walking to a rock. Sokka's hand lifts to rock to reveal Water Tribe clothing hidden underneath.)

Zuko: (Cut to a side view of the scene as Suki and Zuko look on) Are you sure you want to go? (walks to Sokka as he slings his sword) You're the one who said you wanted to redeem yourself. Redeem your honor. Rescuing your Dad is your chance.
Suki: (walks towards Sokka) Your Dad?
Sokka: (Cut to Sokka who looks up at them in desperation) If I had just cut my losses at the invasion, maybe we wouldn't be in this mess. Maybe sometimes it's just better to call it quits before you fail.
Zuko: (Cut back to Zuko) No, it's not. Look Sokka, you're going to fail a lot before things work out.
Sokka: (stands up as he slings is bag over his shoulder while raising his eyebrows) That's supposed to make me feel better? (walks away)
Zuko: Even though you'll probably fail over and over and over again. (Sokka stops in his tracks)
Sokka: Seriously, not helping.
Zuko: (grabs Sokka's shoulder) You have to try every time. You can't quit because you're afraid you might fail.
Chit Sang: (off screen) Hey, (Cut to Chit Sang holding onto the cooler) if you two are done cuddling, can we get a move on?
Sokka: No, I'm staying. (drops his bag as he turns around and address Zuko and Suki) You guys go. (places a hand on Suki's shoulder) You've been here long enough.
Suki: (grabs his hand reassuringly) I'm not leaving without you, Sokka.
Zuko: (comes into screen) I'm staying too.
Chit Sang: Not me, I'm out. Let's roll baby. (he pushes the cooler and jumps into it)
Sokka: (Cut to inside the cooler looking at the trio as they shrink in the distance) We gave up our only chance of escaping. (Cut back to the trio) I hope we haven't just made a huge mistake.

(Scene fades to an area in the water looking up at a gondola. It is nearly dawn. Cut to the cooler sailing across the water slowly. Cut to Chit Sang in the cooler who is wiping perspiration off his face. He stands up and looks around. Cut back to the inside of the cooler to show Chit Sang's buddy and girlfriend perspiring heavily as well.)

Chit Sang: Argh, this current is so slow. (Cut back out into the water to show Chit Sang tearing off a small, metal, rectangular section of the cooler) I can use this to paddle.

(Cut to the "paddle" touching the water and the metal sears under the heat. Chit Sang's hand immediately lets go of the metal piece as he looks at his hand and struggles not to scream. His whole body rapidly reddens as he continues to struggle. He lets out a scream. Cut to an overhead view of the crater to emphasize that his scream can be heard through the whole prison.

Cut to a guard who looks at the cooler in the water. Cut to a hammer hitting a bell. Cut to the bottom of the bell tower as the camera looks up at the 2 people who are sounding the bell. The warden appears into screen.)

Warden: (looks down) Guards! Secure the perimeter (a line of guards run down a platform hurriedly) and lock down the prisoners. Now!

(Cut to a group of prisoners in the yard running off. As they run off screen, a guard brandishes his fire whip and flails it towards the screen. Cut to the prison wall. Camera slowly pans down to show the trio pressing themselves against the wall to avoid being spotted.)

Sokka: The plan failed! They're caught.

(They slowly make their way across the narrow platform. Cut to a huge metal contraption.)

Warden: Get the fugitives and throw them in the Cooler!
Guard: (The guard in charge of the steering wheel turns towards the warden) Uh, they are in the cooler sir.
Warden: (raises his voice towards the guard) One that's bolted down and not floating in the water! This is a lockdown!

(Cut to a side view of the scene and the warden points behind, probably towards the gondola tower) We have new prisoners arriving! Everything must be completely secure!

(The guard turns the steering wheel as a huge crossbow on the contraption is lowered. Cut to an area in the water as the bolt is released. Cut to the outside of the cooler to show the bolt piercing the cooler violently and reeling the cooler in.

Cut to the inside of the cooler to show the huge harpoon contraption covering the cylindrical part of the cooler. Cut to a front shot of Chit Sang and the other escapees who are frightened. Cut to a side view of the scene as the cooler slowly sails across the water, back to the Boiling Rock. Cut to Sokka with his back pressed against a wall. He peers out carefully.)

Sokka: The gondola's moving.

(Cut to the outside of said gondola as it slowly makes its way to the tower. Cut to an area in the yard looking at the gondola tower. Cut to Sokka looking at the gondola.)

Sokka: This is it.

(Cut to the gondola sailing into the tower and docking. There are shadows of various people inside.)

Sokka: If my Dad's not there, we risked everything for nothing.
Suki: We had to.
Sokka: (Cut to a close up of Sokka's anxious face) Come on, come on.

(Cut to a guard opening the door of the gondola. A big, burly man with shaggy long hair, a long beard, a nose ring and a tattoo on his arm walks out handcuffed.)

Zuko: (off screen) Is that him?

(Cut back to the trio)

Sokka: (looks back at Zuko) My Dad doesn't have a nose ring.

(Cut to an area outside the bridge as various prisoners file past. None of them are Hakoda.)

Sokka: (Cut back to Sokka's blue eye staring up at the scene) Where is he?

(Cut to a shirtless man with a topknot walking out of the gondola. No one follows behind him.)

Sokka: (Cut back to Sokka who is looking on with disbelief) That's it? That can't be it.
Suki: I'm sorry Sokka.
Sokka: Oh no. (lowers his head in dismay)
Guard: (off screen) Hey you, (Sokka opens his eyes and the trio look up) get off (Cut to the line of guards in front of the gondola as the guard points to a person inside) the gondola.

(Cut to the floor inside of the gondola looking out at the guards as legs walk into screen. Cut to Sokka who waits nervously in anticipation. Cut to a covered foot stepping out of the gondola. Camera pans up to show Hakoda looking around before disembarking. Cut back to Sokka who widens his eyes.)

Sokka: Dad.

(Fade to white to show a "To Be Continued..." sign.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence, including clips from "The Boiling Rock, Part 1".]



Act I

(The episode opens up to an overhead shot of the Boiling Rock. Cut to an area in the boiling water looking at the pentagonal perimeter. Cut to the Warden walking.)

Guard: Line them up for the Warden!

(Cut to an area behind the Warden, giving an overhead view of the scene. Guards surround the perimeter and the prisoners file in one by one into a straight line. Cut to the end of the line as the last few prisoners walk in. Hakoda's hair braid falls into screen. Camera zooms out to show Hakoda's face. Cut to Sokka running to the scene and pulling up his visor.)

Sokka: Dad. (He rushes from the stairs and nudges some guards aside) Excuse me, coming through. The Warden wants me over there (points) sorry.

(Cut to show Sokka standing behind a line of guards taller than him who are near the prisoners. The warden walks towards the prisoners.)

Warden: Welcome to The Boiling Rock. I'm sure (Cut to a side view of the warden as he walks down the line) you've all heard the horrible rumors about our little island. Well I just want to tell you that they don't have to be true. As long as you (stops in front of Hakoda who is looking down) do everything I say. Look me (closes in on Hakoda's face) in the eye when I'm talking to you.
Hakoda: (His eyes looks to the side) No.
Warden: (Cut to an area behind Hakoda) Oh, you'd rather look at my shoes? Then take a look!

(He uses his foot and pulls down Hakoda's handcuff to the floor. Cut to the side view to show Hakoda in a kneeling position. Cut to Sokka who gapes in surprise. Cut to an area below Hakoda's angry face as the warden's boot remains on his handcuff.)

Warden: I know exactly who you are, Hakoda of the Water Tribe. So strong willed. But don't worry, (Cut to the warden's face as it zooms out slowly) we'll get rid of that in time. Now look me in the eye.

(Cut to show Hakoda lifting his head up with hate.)

Warden: See? Isn't that better. You will (looks to the other prisoners) all do as I say or pay the price. (starts to walk off) You will all...

(Hakoda tilts his handcuffs as the warden's boot get caught in them and he loses his balance. Cut to show Sokka snickering as the guards in front of him rush to the warden's aid.

2 guards run to the warden as he and Hakoda stand up on their own)

Guard: Are you okay, Sir?
Warden: (lashes out) I'm fine! Get these prisoners out of my sight!

(Cut to the area where Sokka's standing at as he sees the prisoners being directed down a flight of stairs. He turns and walks off screen. Cut back to the prisoners housing area. Cut to an overhead view of a cell with Hakoda sitting on a mattress. The door opens. Cut to Hakoda's head as he looks up. The light on his face diminishes as the door closes. Cut to a side view of the scene.)

Sokka: Thank goodness you're okay. (walks towards his Father)
Hakoda: (stands up on the mattress rapidly with his fist out in an attacking position) If you take one step closer you'll (Cut to an area behind Sokka's shoulder to show Hakoda looking very serious) see just how okay I am.
Sokka: (lifts his visor) Dad, it's me. (points to self)
Hakoda: (lowers his arm and tears up) Sokka, my son.

(Sokka removes his helmet and drops it on the floor as they hug. They part after a few seconds.)

Hakoda: You know Sokka, you should be more careful with that guard outfit on. I almost punched you in the gut.
Sokka: Yeah, (rubs his neck) I ran into that problem earlier.

(Cut to someone walking down a corridor. Cut to a metal door as it slides open to reveal Chit Sang with his arms strapped to a chair. Cut to an overhead shot of the cell as the warden walks in.)

Warden: Are you comfortable Chit Sang?
Chit Sang: (Cut to Chit Sang as the warden walks around him) If you're trying to get me to talk, forget it. I'm not a squealer.
Warden: (Cut to back of the warden's head as he turns it slightly to look at his prisoner) Chit Sang, I only asked you if you were comfortable.
Chit Sang: Well, yeah. (smiles) Actually, I am pretty comfortable.

(The warden proceeds to kick the back of the chair as it falls off screen and Chit Sang groans. Cut to Chit Sang's head on the floor as the warden's boot appear into screen.)

Warden: Are you still comfortable?
Chit Sang: (his eyes look up) No.
Warden: I know you and your cronies are not smart enough to come up with that little escape plan. (Cut to Chit Sang's point of view as he looks at the
warden) So you're gonna tell me. Who is?

(The warden walks off. Cut back to Chit Sang's head as 2 pairs of boots appear on screen. Cut to the doorway to show the 2 guards lifting Chit Sang's chair back into position. One of the guard proceeds to close the door. Camera
slowly zooms out. Cut to an area in the yard looking at the gondola tower. Cut
to Sokka's eyes looking through the opening of Hakoda's cell door.)

Sokka: So where's Bato? (Cut back to inside the cell) Where's everyone else from the invasion?
Hakoda: (Cut to Hakoda sitting on the floor, looking at his son) The others are being held at a prison near the Fire Nation palace. They singled me out as their leader and sent me here. (Sokka walks into screen and sits beside his Dad) But before I left I met some young women who said they knew you. The Yoshinama Fighters?
Sokka: You mean the Kyoshi Warriors?
Hakoda: That's right.
Sokka: Their leader Suki is here and she's gonna escape with us.
Hakoda: Good, (lays a hand on his son's shoulder) we'll need all the help we can get.
Sokka: And you know Prince Zuko?
Hakoda: The son of the Firelord? I don't know him, but I knew of him.
Sokka: Well, he's here too.
Hakoda: (crosses his arms and starts to think) Sounds like a major problem.
Sokka: Actually, he's on our side now. (Cut to Hakoda who looks at Sokka sceptically) I know, I had the same reaction. After all he has done, it was hard to trust him. But he's really proven himself and I never would have found you without his help. (Camera zooms out on the pair as Hakoda nods his head)
Hakoda: So, do you have a plan?
Sokka: We had one (looks away) but some of the other prisoners got involved and ruined it. (sets his head on his knees) I don't know if
there's another way off this island.
Hakoda: Sokka, (pats his son's back) there's no prison in the World that can hold two Water Tribe geniuses.
Sokka: Then we'd better find two.

(Hakoda laughs. Cut to Sokka who laughs as well. Cut to the ground level of the prisoners housing area. Sokka enters the screen and looks around. Cut to Sokka walking towards the first door from a flight of stairs. He leans against the door and raises his visor.)

Sokka: Zuko, are you there?
Zuko: (Zuko's eyes appear at the door's opening) I'm here.
Sokka: I just got done talking to my Dad. We came up with an escape plan together.
Male Guard: (off screen) What (Sokka startles) are
you doing here?

(Sokka lowers his visor and turns to the stairs. Camera pans to the right to show a male and female guard staring down at him.)

Sokka: (Cut to an area behind the 2 guards) I was just (pointing to the door) telling this dirty lowlife what I think of him!
Male Guard: (Cut to the 2 guards who look serious) Well, you'll have to do that later, he's coming with us.
Sokka: (looks to Zuko's cell door and back) Why?
Female Guard: (arms akimbo) Because we have orders straight from the Warden. That's why.
Sokka: (Cut back to Sokka who smiles) Could I just get ten more seconds to rough him up a bit? (punches his right fist into his left palm)
Female Guard: (crosses her arms and leans against the railing) Fine, ten seconds.

(The male guard crosses his arms as well. Cut to the 2 guards' backs as Sokka enters the cell.)

Sokka: (off screen) Take that! And this!
Male >Guard: (the female guard shakes her head) Newbie.

(Cut to Sokka's fists punching a rolled up mattress as Zuko pretends to grunt in pain whenever Sokka strikes. Camera zooms out to show Zuko holding the mattress in place while Sokka hits it.)

Sokka: (whispers as he punches) We have a new plan but it's gonna need a big distraction.

(Cut to Zuko's face) Be in the yard in one hour. (The door begins to open as Zuko is caught off guard. Camera zooms out on the guys who are unsure of what to do. As the door the opens, Sokka lunges at Zuko's head as Zuko drops the mattress and attempts to choke Zuko.)

Male Guard: (Cut to an area deep in the room to show the 2 guards entering) Alright, that's enough.

(He pushes Sokka off and gives him a warning finger. They lead Zuko out of his cell. Cut to an overhead shot of Zuko being led away. 2 spectating guards on a railing look down at the scene.)

Zuko: What are you doing? Where are you taking me?

(Cut to the inside of another cell as it opens. The guards shove Zuko in. Cut to a chair in the room as Zuko lands on it. He looks back at the guards.)

Zuko: I didn't do anything wrong.
Mai: (off screen) Come on (Zuko looks to the source of the voice) Zuko. (Cut to show Mai with her head down at the corner of the room) We all know (looks up and walks into the light) that's a lie.
Zuko: (Cut back to Zuko's surprised face) Mai.

(Cut to a side view of Zuko on the floor staring up at Mai as she looks on with his arms crossed.

Cut back to the ground level of the prisoners housing area. Cut to the inside of the cell, looking at the door. It opens to reveal the warden upside down. )

Warden: How is he? (Cut to the 2 guards who are holding Chit Sang's chair upside down. Chit Sang is red in the face as blood rushes to his head due to gravity.)
Guard: I think he's ready to talk.

(The 2 guards throw the chair back into its original position. Cut to Chit Sang who is panting and perspiring profusely. His face slowly fades back to its normal shade. The warden approaches him from behind.)

Warden: (bends his head to Chit Sang's shoulder) Have you had enough time to think about what I asked?
Chit Sang: Yes.
Warden: And?
Chit Sang: You're right. There was another person involved in the escape plan.
Warden: (places a hand on Chit Sang's shoulder) Who?
Chit Sang: It's a guy who's disguised like a prison guard, only he's not a prison guard. He's the mastermind. He came up with the plan.

(The warden pats Chit Sang's head and walks away. Camera slowly zooms in on Chit Sang's face. Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(Scene returns to Zuko sitting down in a chair with his head down. Mai leans against the wall silently.)

Zuko: How did you know I was here?
Mai: (Cut to Mai who looks angry) Because I know you so well.
Zuko: (he looks up to her) But... how?
Mai: (Cut to Mai who looks to the side) The Warden's my Uncle you idiot. (Cut to Zuko who brings his hand to his forehead and groans) The
truth is, (Mai's glove hand comes into screen and she unrolls a letter) I guess I don't know you. All I get is a letter. (Cut to a side view of the scene to show Mai with her hands outstretched at the side) You could have at
least looked me in the eye when you ripped out my heart.
Zuko: (Cut to Zuko who looks at her apologetically) I didn't mean to...
Mai: (interrupts) You didn't mean to? (she walks behind Zuko to read out the contents of the letter) Dear Mai, I'm sorry that you have to find out this way, but I'm leaving.
Zuko: (harshly) Stop! (looks back at Mai) This isn't about you. This is about the Fire Nation.
Mai: Thanks Zuko. That makes me feel all better. (she throws the letter at his head. Zuko grabs his head and rubs the spot she threw the letter at.)
Zuko: (Cut to a side view of the couple) Mai, I never wanted to hurt you. (gets up from his chair and faces Mai) But I have to do this to save my country.
Mai: Save it? You're betraying your country.
Zuko: (Cut back to Zuko) That's not how I see it.

(Cut to Mai who folds her arms and turns to the side sulkily.

Cut to an overhead view of Suki's cell as she practices a series of turns and punches. She ends up with one leg in the air. Cut to her point of view as the door to her cell opens. She lowers her leg to reveal a smiling Sokka.)

Suki: Sokka, (he looks at the opening of Suki's door) what's going on?
Sokka: I don't have much time. (Cut to the outside of the opening looking into the room) If I'm seen with you (Sokka looks out of the
opening) the guards might think something's up. (he lowers his visor before pushing back up again) I just talked to my Dad.

(Cut back to a side shot of the couple inside of the room.)

Suki: That's great.
Sokka: Yeah and we're escaping today. On the gondola.
Suki: (confused) What?
Sokka: My dad and I came up with a plan together. We're gonna commandeer the gondola and (places both hands on Suki's shoulders) we're gonna take a hostage with us so they won't cut the lines.
Suki: (lowers Sokka's arms) We'll never make it onto the gondola. There's too many guards.
Sokka: My dad already thought of that. He said we'll need a distraction. That's why we're gonna start a prison riot.
Suki: (Cut back to Suki who looks skeptical) Okay. Let's say by some miracle this all works and we make it on the gondola. The Warden will still just cut the lines, even if we have a captive.
Sokka: Not if the Warden is the captive. (A sound from outside the cell stops their conversation. Sokka peers at the opening.) I have to go. (Suki rushes into screen and hugs him) I'll find you before we start the riot.

(Cut to an overhead shot of the room as he hugs back. Cut to the outside of Suki's cell as the door opens and Sokka sneaks out, closing the door along the way.)

Male Guard: (off screen) Hey you! (Sokka freezes as 2 guards walk into screen) The Warden wants to see you. (points to Sokka)
Sokka: (turns back) Why?
Male Guard: I don't know. I didn't ask.
Sokka: Maybe I could schedule another time with him? How's tomorrow? (he walks off)
Male Guard: He wants to see you, (Sokka comes back on screen as 2 other guards hold his hands behind his back and leads him away) now.

(Cut to an overhead shot outside with a line of guards standing in front of the Warden.)

Warden: Put him in the line up.

(Cut to show the line of guards without their helmets. Camera pans to the right to show Sokka being shoved into the line up. He loses his balance and brushes on another guard as he pushes him back to position. Sokka's eyes are widen in shock and fear. He attempts to hide behind the other guard but the guard nudges him away.)

Warden: One of you is an imposter who thought (Cut to the warden)
he could fool me. But now that person (Chit Sang is lead to the front of the line up) is going to be in a lot of trouble. Who is it?

(Cut to Chit Sang's eyes as they open. Cut to Sokka who is shaking nervously on the spot. Cut back to Chit Sang's eyes as he blinks and narrows his eyebrows. Cut to Sokka who closes his eyes.)

Chit Sang: (off screen) That's him, (Sokka opens his eyes and is surprised) Warden. (Camera pans to the left to show Chit Sang pointing at the bully guard) He's the imposter.
Bully Guard: (Cut to the bully guard who is outraged) What? (Cut to the warden who smiles. Cut back to the bully guard who grabs Chit Sang by his shirt) I am not. He's lying! (Chit Sang raises both hands nonchalantly as the bully guard is dragged off screen) He's a liar!

(The rest of the guards look on as Chit Sang smiles since he gets even with the bully guard. Camera pans to the right to show Sokka looking on and sighing with relief. Cut to an opening in a dark room with sunlight streaming into it. Camera pans down to show the bully guard strapped to a chair in prisoner garb.)

Bully Guard: I'm telling you, it wasn't me.
Warden: Save your breath. I know you've been working together. (The warden comes close to the guard's face) You threw Chit Sang in the very cooler they used to escape. It was all part of your plan.
Bully Guard: That was just a coincidence.
Guard: (the door opens and a voice sounds off screen) Sir, there's someone to see you.
Warden: (turns his head to the door) Who told you to interrupt me! (his eyes widen and camera cuts to an area in the room facing the door. Azula is standing at the doorway. The guards bow down in respect)
Azula: I did. (Ty Lee can be seen behind her)
Warden: (Cut to Azula with her arms akimbo, amused) Princess Azula. Uh, it is an honor (Azula and Ty Lee walk into the room) to welcome you to the Fire Nation's most exemplary prison. I didn't realize (stands up) you were coming.
Azula: (walks in some more) Who is this?
Warden: (Cut to the guard who looks at the warden and then looks away) He's a guard who was involved in a recent and feeble escape attempt.
Bully Guard: It wasn't me. (Cut to an area behind the guard's head)
Warden: Quiet you. (points to the guard)
Azula: You're wasting your time. (turns and walks to the door) That's not one of them.
Warden: (stunned) How do you know?
Azula: (Cut to Azula) Because I'm a people person.

(She walks out and closes the door behind her. Cut to shot overlooking the whole prisoner housing area. Camera zooms out to show a guard in a control room, looking at the scene.)

Sokka: (He enters the screen) Hey, I just got orders. Let the prisoners out into the yard.
Guard: (crosses arms) But we're in the middle of lockdown.
Sokka: Oh, okay. (he waves his hand dismissively and walks off) I'll just go tell the Warden you said that. I'm sure (the guard raises his visor) he'll be glad to hear about you undermining his authority. (Sokka comically enters back into screen, raising his visor) What's your name again? (The guard perspires nervously as Sokka disappears off screen)
Guard: (throws his arm out) Wait. Don't tell the Warden, I... I'm just a little confused.
Sokka: (Cut to an overhead shot of the room) Hey, I'm confused too. (turns< back to the guard) But the Warden's in a bad mood and irrational. So if you ask me, (puts an arm on the guard's shoulder and turns him towards the controls) it's best not to question it and just do what he
says.
Guard: Yeah, you're right. (Cut to his hands pulling down the various levers as a bell rings off) We're letting them out.

(The door of each cell opens up floor by floor. The prisoners immediately leave their cells. Cut to Suki who is kneeling in her cell. She looks to the door as it opens. Prisoners rush past her door. She stands up. Cut to an overhead view of another door to reveal Hakoda. Cut to an overhead shot of the yard as the prisoners stream into it. Cut to reveal Suki, Sokka and Hakoda meeting up.)

Sokka: This is it. We have to start a riot.
Suki: Okay, but how do we do that?

(Cut to Hakoda who looks to the side. Cut to the back of a group of prisoners. Cut back to Hakoda who smirks slyly.)

Hakoda: I'll show you.

(Hakoda walks off screen. Cut to an overhead shot of the group of prisoners as Hakoda runs in and shoves the back of a big, burly prisoner.)

Prisoner: Hey, why did you do that for? That hurt my feelings.
Hakoda: (Cut to a side view of the "confrontation") Aren't you mad at me?
Prisoner: Uhh, well normally I would be, but I've been working to control my anger. (Cut back to Sokka who looks on with disbelief)
Sokka: This isn't working.

(A hand lands on Sokka's shoulder.)

Chit Sang: Hey you. (Camera pans to show Chit Sang) You're lucky I didn't rat you out. But my generosity comes with a price. I know you're planning another escape attempt and I want in.
Sokka: Actually, we're trying to escape right now. But we need a riot. (points to Chit Sang) You wouldn't happen to know how to start one would you?
Chit Sang: A prison riot? (pushes Sokka's arm to the side) Please. (Walks off screen.Cut to show Chit Sang grabbing another prisoner by his shirt as the prisoner shrieks. Cut to the back view of Chit Sang as he carries the prisoner over his head. ) Hey! (He hoists the prisoner up and down) Riot! (the yard breaks into chaos as flames are bended all over the place)

Hakoda: (Cut back to Hakoda with Sokka staring dumb founded in the background.) Impressive.

(Sokka and Suki look at each other. Camera zooms out to show the prisoner Hakoda shoved earlier.)

Prisoner: Forget about controlling my anger. Let's riot!

(A prisoner jumps into screen to knock him down. Cut the floor of the yard as chaos and dust ensues everywhere. Cut to a prisoner sitting on another prisoner's shoulders, attempting to choke him. Cut to the bottom of a tower as various guards look down at the scene.)

Warden: Who let these prisoners into the yard? This is supposed to be a lockdown!

(The guard who in charge of the control room raises his visor and blushes in embarrassment as he sneaks away. Cut back to Zuko and Mai in the room. Camera pans to a guard standing at the doorway.)

Guard: Ma'am, there's a riot going on. I'm here to protect you.
Mai: (Cut to the back of Mai's head as she turns around) I don't need any protection.
Zuko: (Zuko laughs slightly) Hah, believe me. She doesn't.
Guard: (Cut to the guard walking into the room) I'm sorry but I'm under direct orders (Cut to Zuko who looks serious) from your Uncle to make sure nothing happens.

(Zuko takes the chance and firebends at the guard's feet and rushes out of the room. The guard attempts to shield Mai from the fire.)

Mai: Get off of me!

(She throws the guard to the side and runs to the door. Cut to a back view of Mai running towards the exit as Zuko slides the door shut. Cut to the outside of the door as Zuko meddles with the lock. Cut to Mai's eyes staring at Zuko through the opening. Cut to Zuko's eyes and he stares back. He closes his eyes and rushes off as Mai continues to look at him through the opening.

Cut to Chit Sang, Sokka, Hakoda and Suki standing at the bottom of another tower, trying to stay out of the chaos. Zuko comes into screen and throws a guard who attempts to subdue him over his shoulder. He runs in front of Sokka.)

Sokka: Zuko, good. We're all here. Now all we need to do (points to the top of another tower) is grab the Warden and get to the gondolas.
Zuko: And how do we do that?
Sokka: (looks back at Zuko) I'm not sure.
Zuko: Argh, I thought you thought this through.
Sokka: (in hysterics) I thought you told me it's okay not to think
everything through!
Zuko: (Cut side view shot of the argument. Zuko has his fists clenched.) Maybe not everything. But this is kind of important. (Zuko grabs his head. While Sokka puts his finger on his chin in thought.)
Chit Sang: Hey, uhh, fellas. I think your girlfriend's taking care of it.

(Cut to Sokka who peers from behind Chit Sang's elbow in surprise. Cut to a
guard and a prisoner scuffling as Suki runs into screen and jumps on their heads. Camera pans across the sea of prisoners' heads to show Suki running rapidly on their heads. Cut to another prisoner who is surprised to feel something on his head. Cut to Suki's back view to show her nearing the tower. She leaps onto the tower and scales the wall rapidly. She pushes herself from the wall as she back flips to land her feet on some pipes below the platform.

Suki flips herself from below the platform to a railing as a guard comes by and starts to firebend. She flips off the railing, narrowly missing the flames and gives the guard a series of punches that knocks him unconscious. Cut to 2 guards running out from a corridor. One of the guards aims a firebending kick towards Suki but she dodges and uses her arm to trip his other leg, sending him to the ground with a loud thud. Cut to the other guard who firebends but Suki dodges and jumps to the railing behind him. She quickly jumps onto the wall. The guard stares at her, dumbfounded.

Cut to an overhead shot of Suki who scales the wall with fierce determination. Cut to the warden who looks down with shock. Cut to an area behind the warden as Suki flips herself over the railing and landing down on the platform. The guard near the warden gets into a stance and before he does so, Suki slides on the ground and trips him over.

The warden attempts to move but Suki gets up and holds his arm in a deadlock grip. Her other hand is positioned dangerously in front of the warden's face should he attempt to fight back. She stares at him.)

Warden: You wouldn't dare.

(Suki turns the warden around and brings his hands together as she ties rapidly them with a red string. Cut to a front shot of the warden as Suki remains behind, pulling down the warden's headband and turning it around so the tie is on his mouth.)

Suki: Sorry Warden, (she tightens the tie and lets go) you're my prisoner now.

(She slams him against the wall. Cut to the other end of the platform to show that the rest of the guys have caught up with her.)

Suki: We've got the Warden, now let's get out of here.

(She looks at them. Cut to the guys who are trying to catch their breath.)

Hakoda: (holds his stomach) That's some girl.
Sokka: (looks at Suki) Tell me about it.

(Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(Scene returns to an overhead shot of the gondola tower. Prisoners can still be seen rioting below. The group is shown running up a staircase towards the gondola. Cut to the back view of Suki and Sokka running.)

Suki: (turns back to Sokka) We're almost there.

(The >rest of the group runs into screen. The warden is carried on Chit Sang's shoulder. Cut to the guards at the gondola as they proceed to firebend at the group. Cut back to the group as Zuko shoves Sokka aside and intercepts the flame, dissipating it immediately. Cut to the guards as more join in to help. Cut back to Zuko.)

Zuko: Back off, we've got the Warden.

(He moves aside and the camera pans across the group. Cut to the warden who looks up from Chit Sang's shoulder and mumbles under the tie. The guards loosen their stances.)

Zuko: Let's go.

(The group slowly and warily walk past the guards with their arms outstretched should the guards attack them. Cut to the gondola area as Zuko stops at the end of the platform while the rest run towards the gondola. Cut to the inside of the gondola as the door slides aside to reveal Suki.)

Suki: Everyone in.

(Sokka boards the gondola first. Cut to an overhead view of the gondola as the rest run in. Cut back to Zuko who still remains at the platform and he runs to the lever, pushing it down. Cut to the ropes of the gondola as it loosens and uncoils. Cut back inside the gondola as it slowly moves off, leaving Zuko behind. Cut back to Zuko who kicks the lever several times. He turns his head and the camera pans to reveal the guards running towards him. With one final kick, he successfully breaks the lever and runs towards the gondola.

Camera cuts to an area below the gondola tower's railings. Zuko flies over the railings with fire balls sailing over his head. Cut to a side view shot of the gondola as Zuko is seen coming up to it. Cut to Sokka reaching out his arm as he catches Zuko. He struggles under the weight. Zuko manages to grab hold to the sides of the gondola as Sokka holds his arms for support as Zuko climbs in.)

Sokka: (Cut back to inside the gondola) What are you doing?
Zuko: I'm making it so they can't stop us.
Sokka: Way to think ahead.
Suki: We're on our way.

(Cut to Hakoda who is looking back at the gondola tower.)

Hakoda: Wait. Who's that?

(Sokka and Zuko turn their heads. Cut to Azula, Ty Lee and some guards back at the gondola tower as they look at the fleeing gondola.)

Zuko: (off screen) That's a problem. (the guards proceed to bow in respect) It's my sister and her friend.

(Cut back to inside of the gondola as Zuko and Hakoda look back to the tower. Cut back to a side view shot of Azula's face looking at the gondola. She turns her head to the side. Cut to the back of a nearby guard as Azula's arm comes into screen and grabs the handcuffs clipped on the guard's waist.

Cut to the lines of the gondola as Ty Lee cartwheels onto them. Azula is seen running ahead below the lines. Ty Lee proceeds to run on the line. Cut to the line as Ty Lee's shoe runs on it. Cut to an overhead shot of Ty Lee as she rapidly runs across the line. Cut to a side view shot of the scene as the guards look on. Azula is seen readying herself.

Cut to Azula fists as she firebends a huge jet of blue fire. Cut to an over head shot of Azula as she propels herself from the ground into the air. Cut to the line as the handcuff locks around it. Cut to the side view of Azula as she places on arm and a leg behind her and firebends another huge jet of fire. The force slides her across the line. Cut to an overhead shot of Ty Lee running on the upper line as Azula comes into screen on the lower line. Cut back to Suki and Zuko inside the gondola.)

Suki: This is a rematch I've been waiting for.
Zuko: Me too.

(He proceeds to climb up to the gondola's roof. Cut to an overhead shot of the 2 girls as they're seen nearing the gondola. Cut back to the roof of the gondola as Suki, Sokka and Zuko prepare themselves. Sokka unsheathes his sword. Cut to the side view of the gondola as the 3 look at the 2 girls. Cut to a close up of Ty Lee's face as the cartwheels off the line, onto the roof, facing Suki. Cut to the other side of the gondola facing the guys' backs as Azula lands onto screen in a crouch.

Cut to Azula who stands up with an evil grin on her face. Cut to an overhead shot of the stand off. Cut back to Azula who gets into a stance with her arms outstretched in front of her. Cut to Zuko's shoe as Azula firebends with her feet towards his. Cut to Sokka and Zuko as Zuko jumps and firebends the flames away.

Cut to the side view of Suki and Ty Lee. Cut to Ty Lee's determined face. Cut to Suki who makes the first move. Ty Lee attempts to chi block Suki but Suki blocks all her shots deftly. Suki attempts to punch Ty Lee but Ty Lee brings up her arm and intercepts the punch. They struggle briefly with neither one gaining the upper hand. Suki punches again but Ty Lee flips off screen.

Cut to Ty Lee's hands. Cut to the side view of the scene as Ty Lee flips into the gondola. Cut back inside the gondola as Ty Lee enters through the opening and swiftly exits by another opening back up onto the roof. Cut back to Suki as Ty Lee appears back behind her. Ty Lee attempts to chi block Suki again but Suki dodges off screen at the last moment. Ty Lee continues to fight. A jet of blue fire comes into screen.

Cut to an overhead shot of Suki being cornered near the gondola's metal extension which links to the cable. Camera slowly pans to the guys as Suki and Ty Lee grunt off screen. Azula is seen firebending. Cut to Zuko who pushes Azula's flame apart with his bare hands, dissipating it. Sokka proceeds to swing his sword.

Cut to Azula who dodges it and as the sword finishes its arc, she stands up again. She firebends towards Sokka. Cut to a side view of Sokka backing off as Zuko takes over, breaking the flame apart with his hands and firebending towards his sister. Cut to an area behind Zuko as he is shown firebending at her feet. Azula jumps and turns before landing back down with a grin. Her eyes suddenly widen and blink. Cut to Sokka's sword as it glints in the sunlight. Cut to Azula who moves back. Cut to an undershot of the scene as Azula is pushed near the edge of the roof.

Cut to Sokka who moves back and Zuko taking the lead by firebending at his sister's feet. Azula jumps and lands in a push up position. Cut to the back view of Azula as she is shown balancing only on her hands. Cut to a front shot of Azula as she moves her legs across her body and firebends at the guys. Cut back to the guys as the move aside.

Cut to the side view of the gondola as the fire travels towards Suki and Ty Lee as they also part to let the flame pass by. Ty Lee is seen cartwheeling. Cut to the inside of the gondola as Chit Sang looks up at the scene. The warden is seen fidgeting. Cut to the warden's hands as he tries to loosen the string.

Cut to a guard's point of view looking through a telescope at the warden inside the gondola.)

Guard #1: (off screen) There's the Warden. I see him!

(Cut to the guard looking at through the telescope. The other guards turn towards him.Cut back to the warden's hands as he successfully breaks the string.
Cut to Chit Sang looking out of the gondola. The warden appears beside him and pulls down the tie covering his mouth.)

Warden: Cut the line!

(Chit Sang covers the warden's mouth and holds him back.)

Guard #2: (Cut to the back view of the guard with the telescope as 2 other guards run into screen) He wants us to cut the line.
Guard #3: (Cut back to the guard with the telescope with the 2 guards standing behind him) But if we cut the line, there's no way he'll survive.
Guard #1: (brings down the telescope) He knows that.

(Cut to a metal object being brought near the wheel that contains the line as it sparks under friction. Camera zooms up to show a guard struggling to hold the metal object in place. Cut to 2 guards behind him who are holding a huge hacksaw.

Cut back to the gondola's roof as Azula fires a shot towards her brother but Zuko once again, breaks the fire apart and sends another shot towards his sister. Cut to Azula who jumps and firebends back as she lands. Cut to Zuko as he breaks the fire apart again. Cut to Suki and Ty Lee who are still fighting. They lose their balance as the gondola stops suddenly.

Cut to the side view of the gondola as it sways to and fro precariously. Cut back to the guard manning the metal object near the wheel. The wheel stops turning. Cut to Sokka who is sliding off the roof. Cut to Zuko moving towards Sokka. Cut to Sokka's hand as it slides across the roof. Zuko's hand comes into screen and grabs Sokka's arm. Camera zooms out to show Sokka on the edge of the roof and the gondola sways some more. Once the gondola stops moving, Zuko pulls Sokka up.

Cut to an overhead shot of the gondola's roof as it tilts slightly. Ty Lee is seen climbing up the metal extension while Azula is seen regaining her balance. Cut to Ty Lee jumping to the top of the metal extension, looking back at the tower.)

Ty Lee: They're about to cut the line!

(Cut to Ty Lee's back looking down at Azula as Azula turns her head back to the tower. Cut back to the tower as 2 guards proceed to saw the line. Camera zooms out to Azula who turns back. Camera cuts to Azula's back as she, Ty Lee and Suki look at another gondola coming in. Camera zooms in on the other gondola.)

Azula: (Cut back to Azula's face) Then it's time to leave. (She smiles and propels herself from the roof with her firebending. Cut to Azula sailing through the air, looking down at the roof.) Goodbye Zuko.

(Cut to Zuko who is holding onto Sokka, looking up at his sister. Cut to Azula who stops bending as she back flips and lands on the other gondola's roof. Cut to Ty Lee who also flips onto the roof. Cut to Suki, Sokka and Zuko looking at the other gondola as it sails back to the tower.

Cut to Ty Lee and Azula who look back as the gondola continues moving. Cut back to inside the gondola as Zuko flips back into it.)

Zuko: They're cutting the line. The gondola's about to go!
Hakoda: I hope this thing floats.

(Camera pans from the gondola down to the water. Cut back to the guards who are still sawing. Cut to a close up of the blade as the lines break. Stilettos fly into screen as the guards holding the saw are thrown off screen. Cut to docking area as the stiletto pins the guard's wristguard to the structure. He looks at another guard who comes into screen with the same fate.)

Guard: What are you doing?!
Mai: (Cut to Mai) Saving the jerk who dumped me.

(Cut to the guards who move towards Mai. Cut to Mai's hand as she releases a stiletto into it while a guard proceeds to firebend at her. Cut to a front shot of Mai as she throws the stilettos and dodges the flames. Cut back to the guards as some of them gets pinned by her weapons. The guards who remain untouched continue to firebend at Mai. Cut to Mai who slides across the floor, narrowly missing the flames.

She slides across the 2 wheels as she stands up and releases more stilettos into her hands. The guards who run towards her get pinned by down by her weapons. Cut to a close up of a female guard as she widens her eyes. Cut to a side view of the guard as Mai uses her as a shield and throws more stilettos at the guards behind her. Cut back to Mai who releases another stiletto and brings the female guard to the floor and pins her wrist guard to the floor.

Cut to an overhead shot of the wheel as Mai kicks away the metal object that is preventing the lines from being loosened. The wheel turns and the gondola continues to move. Cut back to inside the gondola looking back at the tower.)

Sokka: (Cut to a front shot of Sokka who looks out of the opening) Who is that?

(The others join in to look back at the tower. Cut back to Mai who continues to fend off the guards by herself. Cut to a close up of Mai as she turns her head back to the gondola.)

Zuko: (Cut to a shocked Zuko) It's Mai.
Azula: (Cut to a furious Azula) What is she doing?!

(Cut to the backs of Azula and Ty Lee as Ty Lee shrugs and makes a "I don't know" noise.

Cut to the gondola as it reaches the outer part of the crater. Cut to the inside of the entrance tower as the door opens and Suki rushes out followed by Sokka, Zuko, Hakoda and Chit Sang. Hakoda turns towards Chit Sang and points to the inside of the gondola. Chit Sang proceeds to throw the warden back in.)

Hakoda: (Cut to the back of Hakoda's head looking at the warden lying on the floor) Sorry Warden, your record is officially broken.

(Hakoda walks off screen while the warden continues to struggle on the floor. Cut to a front shot of the group as they run up a rocky incline.)

Suki: Well, we made it out. Now what?
Sokka: (Sokka stops and looks back at Zuko who pauses in his tracks, thinking) Zuko, what are you doing?
Zuko: My sister was on that island.
Sokka: Yeah and she's probably right behind us. So let's not stop.
Zuko: What I mean is she must have come here somehow. (He runs to the edge of the rocks and looks down) There. (Cut to an area looking up at the edge of the cliff) That's our way out of here.

(Camera pans down to reveal a Fire Nation zeppelin docked at the shore.

Cut back to the gondola tower as Mai is brought in front of Azula by the guards. Cut to Azula who looks on angrily. Cut to a front shot of Mai as she lowers her head so that her fringe covers her eyes.)

Azula: (off screen) Leave us alone.

(The guards let go of Mai's shoulder and does a Fire Nation bow. Mai lifts her head up.)

Azula: (Cut back to Azula) I never expected this from you.

(Cut back to a side view of Mai. Cut to Ty Lee who is clasping her hands, staring at Mai and back at Azula with a frightened look. Cut back to Azula.)

Azula: The thing I don't understand is why (lifts her head up) Why would you do it? You know the consequences.

(Azula lowers her head down and glares at Mai. Cut back to a side view of the scene. Cut back to Mai.)

Mai: I guess you just don't know people as well as you think you do. You miscalculated. (Cut back to Azula) I love Zuko more than I fear you. (Azula's face scrunches up in fury.)
Azula: (outburst) No, you miscalculated! You should have feared me more!

(Cut to Azula she gets into a stance. Cut to Mai who brings up her stiletto. Her weapon glints under the sunlight. Cut back to Azula who begins to strike but Ty Lee comes into screen, jabbing her back with a series of punches. Cut to Mai who looks stunned. Cut to Azula who gasps and falls to the ground to reveal Ty Lee who looks on. Ty Lee runs to Mai.)

Ty Lee: Come on, (pulls Mai's arm) let's get out of here!

(She tries to drag Mai away but guards surround them)

Azula: (Camera pans to Azula on the floor as she glares at them furiously) You're both fools.

(Boots come into screen as the guards help her up. Cut back to Mai and Ty Lee who are captured by the guards.)

Guard: What shall we do with them, princess?
Azula: (Azula's head comes into screen) Put them somewhere (Camera slowly zooms in on Mai and Ty Lee who have unreadable expressions on their faces) I'll never have to see their faces again. (Cut back to Azula) And let them rot.

(Scene cuts to the night sky. Camera pans down to the Western Air Temple. Azula's zeppelin can be seen docked near the temple's structures. Cut to a close up under shot of the zeppelin. Cut to a side view of Aang, Katara and Toph who stand in front of the zeppelin as Zuko and Sokka walk out.)

Katara: What are you doing in this thing? What happened to the war balloon?
Zuko: (Cut to Zuko) It kind of got destroyed.
Aang: (Cut back to the welcoming party) Sounds like a crazy fishing trip.
Toph: Did you at least get some good meat?
Sokka: (Cut to a close up of Sokka) I did. (closes his eyes) The best meat of all. (opens his eyes) The meat of friendship and fatherhood.

(Cut to the entrance of the zeppelin as Suki and Hakoda disembark. Chit Sang appears shortly behind them)

Chit Sang: (waves) I'm new. What's up everybody?
Katara: (Cut to Katara who tears up) Dad. (she runs towards her Father)
Hakoda: (Cut back to Hakoda) Hi, Katara.

(Camera zooms out to show Katara embracing her Dad.)

Katara: (Cut to Sokka's back as he looks on. Katara lets go) How are you here? What is going on? (looks at her brother) Where did you go?
Sokka: (Cut to Sokka) We... kind of went to a Fire Nation prison.

(Zuko nods. Katara's gloved hand comes into screen and grabs Sokka by his arm. Zuko smiles. Cut to the siblings embracing their Dad.)

Toph: (Cut to an overhead view of the scene as the camera slowly zooms out) Seriously, you guys didn't find any meat?

(Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence, including clips from "The Crossroads of Destiny" and "The Western Air Temple".]



Act I

(Episode opens up to the upside down pagodas of the Western Air Temple. Cut to the area near the fountain where everyone is sleeping in a circle. Camera pans across a sleeping Suki, Chit Sang and Hakoda. Cut to Teo in his sleeping bag and camera pans across The Duke and Zuko who are also asleep. Cut to Aang who yawns and rubs his eyes after sleeping on Appa. Camera pans across with him looking at the fountain with birds surrounding them. The birds fly off and an object flies into screen.

Cut to Aang who immediately gets off Appa and twirls his glider, airbending the object away. Camera zooms out on the pagodas as the bomb hits the top of the cliff and explodes. More bombs are hurled towards the Western Air Temple from below the clouds. Cut back to the sleeping area as everyone wakes up from the noise. Cut to the back view of Aang as he runs forward. Cut to his point of view to reveal 3 black shapes coming out from the clouds.

Cut to the side view of the shapes to reveal the Fire Nation airships rising up from the clouds. A canon from one of the air ships fires. Cut to a bridge on the temple as it gets destroyed by a bomb. Cut back to the sleeping area as Aang retreats into it and twirls his staff, airbending a huge gust of air. Cut to an overhead shot of the fountain to show that he airbended the doors closed. More bombs are hurled and they explode.

Cut to the ceiling as it crumbles and shakes. One of the pieces dislodges. Cut to a top view of Katara who looks up.)

Zuko: (pushing her out of the way) Watch out!

(They roll and tumble before the ceiling piece lands at the spot Katara was.)

Katara: What are you doing?!
Zuko: Keeping rocks from crushing you.
Katara: Okay, I'm not crushed. You can get off me now.

(She slides out from under Zuko irritably)

Zuko: I'll take that as a thank you.

(He stands. Cut to a wall being crumbled apart to reveal a tunnel. Camera zooms out to show Haru and Toph are the ones who created it.)

Toph: (turns back and points to the tunnel) Come on, we can get out through here!

(Cut to an overhead view of the scene as they evacuate to the tunnel. Cut to Aang who is pulling on Appa's reins towards the tunnel.)

Aang: What are you doing?
Zuko: (Camera zooms out to show Zuko isn't evacuating) Go ahead, I'll hold them off. I think this is a family visit.

(Zuko runs towards the air ships.)

Aang: (Cut back to Aang who looks on, stunned) Zuko, no!

(Sokka and Katara are seen running towards him from behind.)

Sokka: (grabs Aang's shoulder) Come on, we gotta get out of here.

(All 3 proceed to pull on Appa's reins. Cut to a shot of the partially destroyed air temple doors. Zuko jumps over the crumpled portions. Cut to Zuko running. Cut to a bomb flying into screen and exploding with black smoke everywhere. Zuko jumps out from the smoke with a smoke sphere around him, unharmed and he starts to firebend. Cut to the underside of the airship as it gets hit by Zuko's flames. Cut to Zuko's back view as an observation stand rises into screen. Cut to show Azula looking down from the stand. She is smiling crazily. Cut to an overhead view of Azula's airship.)

Zuko: (Cut to Zuko and camera slowly zooms out on him) What are you doing here?
Azula: (Cut to Azula) You mean it's not obvious yet (opens her arms out) I'm about to celebrate becoming an only child!

(She flips over the railings and firebends with her feet to Zuko. Cut to a back view of Azula as the flips back and the area Zuko was at explodes, covering the entire in black smoke. Cut to Zuko who is running away from the explosion and falls down from the impact. Cut to a pillar breaking apart. Cut to the underside of the structure as it shakes. Cut to the floor as cracks and fissures rapidly appear. Zuko gets up and runs across the floor. He proceeds to run up a pillar. As the pillar slowly falls, Zuko launches himself off it. Cut to Zuko sailing through the air as he firebends. Cut to a side view of the scene as his first 2 shots misses the observation stand but the third one finally hits it.

Cut to the bottom of the observation stand as Azula jumps off and lands below before the flames hit. Cut to Zuko who is falling rapidly and struggling to hold on to the Fire Nation symbol on the airship. Cut to a top view of Zuko who vanishes into the clouds. Cut back to Azula who stands up and looks on. Cut back to the crumbling structure of the sleeping area. Cut to Toph who grinds her teeth with her hands up. Cut to her back view to show her trying to support the tunnel. Appa can be seen resisting.)

Aang: (Cut to a side view of the 3 outside the tunnel as they tug the reins to no avail) I can't get him to go in there. Appa hates tunnels.
Katara: (Cut to a close up of Katara as their arms tremble against Appa's resistance) Aang, there's no way we can fly out of here.
Aang: We'll have to finda way. (they loosen their hold on the reins)
Sokka: We need to split up. (runs towards the group in the tunnel) Take the tunnel and get to the stolen airship.
Katara: (Cut to Katara who turns her head back) No, (Cut to a side view of Katara as she walks to Hakoda) the Fire Nation can't separate our family again.
Hakoda: (places his hands on her shoulders) It'll be okay, it's not forever.

(Cut to an area behind Hakoda's shoulder as Katara visibly doesn't want to do this. She gives her Dad a hug and runs back to Appa. Hakoda proceeds to squeeze Sokka's arm and hugs him. Sokka then pulls Suki away. Cut to Hakoda who looks on and turns back. Cut to the legs of the fleeing group in the tunnel. Appa moves to the side. Cut to Katara in the saddle as the stretches her hand out to help Suki into the saddle. Cut to Toph who touches the wall.)

Toph: (Cut to an area on the ground looking at Appa as Aang climbs onto his horns onto his head) I can clear that away and we can fly out through there.

(She earthbends herself onto Appa.)

Suki: (Cut to the inside of the saddle as Toph lands) Umm, there's an awful lot of fire in that general direction. (They cringe as their surroundings continue to crumble and shake)
Aang: (Camera pans down to Appa's head) We'll get through, let's go.

(Cut back to the outside looking at the Western Air Temple. The fallen pile of debris and rocks are thrown apart as Appa flies off. Cut to the underside of Appa which has a shield of earth in front of its face. Cut back to Azula who turns around and spots the flying bison. She firebends at the earth shield but it doesn't break apart. She ducks as Appa flies over. Cut to a side view of Appa as Toph earthbends the shield into pieces. Cut back to a smiling Azula as she cocks an eyebrow and looks back to a rising airship behind her. She moves aside to reveal Zuko standing on the airship, looking back.

Cut to a close up of Zuko who looks on with determination. Cut to the group who look back with surprise. Cut to the back view of Zuko. Cut to the side view of Azula. Cut back to Zuko as he moves off screen. Cut to his legs as he runs and propels himself. Cut to the bottom of Zuko between the 2 airships as he leaps off from one airship to the other. Cut to an overhead shot of Azula who firebends at her brother. Cut to Zuko who is still sailing through the air as he kicks the flame aside and firebends back.

Cut to Azula who does a backward somersault to avoid the flame. Zuko lands into screen in front of her. Cut the side view of the fight as Zuko firebends at Azula but she dissipates it with a swipe of her arm. Cut to the back of Azula's arm as she sends another shot to her brother who also swipes it aside. Azula moves off screen. Zuko sends a shot to his sister and rushes in.

Cut to Appa as it flies above the clouds, dodging the fire. Katara is standing up on the saddle with water circling around her to prevent the fire from hitting the saddle.

Cut to the bottom of another airship as various elite firebenders stand at the edge and proceed to firebend. Cut to Aang who pulls up Appa's reins. Cut to a side view of Appa flying up to get away from the fire. Cut to a close up of Appa is it flies over the air ship while Aang struggles to control his bison.

Cut back to Azula who swipes her brother's fire away with her right and her left hand. She then sends her own shots to Zuko. Cut to Zuko who kicks away the flames with his right and left foot. More shots come into screen and he swipes them away with his hands while closing in on his sister. Cut to a side view of the fight as Zuko is seen nearing Azula. Cut to Azula as she throws her left first out and time slows down. Cut to Zuko who pushes Azula's fire away with his
right hand and bringing out his flaming left fist. Camera zooms out on the two as they collide their firsts and the impact causes a huge explosion. Cut to an overhead view of the air ship as a big puff of black smoke covers the top of the air ship.

Cut to Azula on her back as she skids across the surface of the air ship. She gets flipped onto her stomach and she struggles to hold on but is thrown off. Cut to Zuko who tumbles across the surface and his eyes widen in fear as he falls off the air ship. Camera zooms out to show the siblings falling. Appa flies into screen and Zuko reaches out his arm and Katara pulls him back into the safety of the saddle. Cut to the inside of the saddle as Zuko and the rest look back at Azula.

Cut to Azula who is falling and spinning around. Cut back to Zuko.)

Zuko: She's not going to make it.

(Cut to a frustrated Azula as she tugs the hairpiece off her hair and firebends with her feet as the force propels her to the nearby cliff. As she nears the cliff, she backflips and digs her hairpiece into the rocks as she skids down, pushing her legs against the rocks to slow down her descend. She finally stops. Cut back to Zuko.)

Zuko: Of course she did.

(He looks away and camera zooms out on the group who look back at Azula. Cut back to Azula who looks on with a satisfied smirk. Scene fades to night the top of a rocky hill and camera slowly zooms in on the group seated around a campfire. Appa can be seen sleeping at the side.)

Aang: Wow, camping. It really seems like old times again, doesn't it
Zuko: (Cut to Zuko who breaks a biscuit in half) If you really want to feel like old times, I could, uhh... chase you around a while and try to capture you.

(Camera zooms out on the laughing group as Zuko eats his biscuit.)

Katara: (Cut to a close up side view of Katara who looks down sorely) Haha.
Sokka: (Cut to Sokka and he raises his cup) To Zuko. Who knew after all those times he tried to snuff us out, today, he be our hero. (Cut to Sokka's point of view as the rest except Katara raise their cups)
Toph, Aang, Suki & Sokka: Here, here. (Toph and Aang nudge Zuko with their elbows)
Zuko: (smiles warmly) I'm touched. I don't deserve this.
Katara: (Cut to Katara who glares at him) Yeah, no kidding. (Cut to an overhead view of the group as she stands up and leaves)
Sokka: (raises an eyebrow) What's with her?
Zuko: (stands up) I wish I knew. (He walks off as the others look at him quizzically)
Sokka: What's with him?

(Cut to a side view of the whole scene. Zuko can be seen following Katara near the edge of a cliff. Cut to the full moon partially covered by some clouds. Cut to the cliff as Katara is seen kneeling and Zuko still walking towards her. Cut to Katara who notices Zuko. She gets up and moves away.)

Zuko: This isn't fair. (puts both arms out) Everyone else seems to trust me now. What is it with you? (swipes one arm to the side)
Katara: (Cut to Katara's back as she turns around and snaps) Oh, everyone trust you now? (places hand on chest) I was the first person to trust you, remember Back in Ba Sing Se. (points to the ocean) And you turned (Cut to Zuko who looks down guiltily) around and betrayed me. Betrayed all of us.
Zuko: (raises head) What can I do to make it up to you?
Katara: You really want to know? (walks towards Zuko) Hmm, maybe you could re-conquer (Cut to Zuko's unscarred side who looks on speechlessly) Ba Sing Se in the name of the Earth King. Or, (Zuko steps back as Katara's head pops into screen) I know. You could bring my mother back.

(She hits Zuko shoulder with hers as she walks past. Zuko looks back sadly. Cut to an overhead view of the cliff as the waves crash at the bottom of it. Cut to the tents. Cut to Suki who looks around warily. Zuko walks out from the rock between them. They don't see each other until the last minute where they accidentally bump into each other.)

Suki: (raises her arms and blushes) Opps, wrong tent.
Zuko: (Suki walks away) Sorry. Do you need to talk to Sokka too?
Suki: (still blushing) Nope. (moves her arms in a "No" gesture) Not me.

(She moves off screen. Cut to the inside of Sokka's tent as Zuko enters with an exaggerated, animated sweat drop expression on his face. Cut to Sokka who is lying on his stomach on a mat surrounded by candles that exudes a romantic ambience. There's a bunch of roses hung above him.)

Sokka: (turns his head with a rose in his mouth) Well, hellooo. (His eyes widen as a comical sound effect plays and he swallows the rose. Cut to a sideview of the scene as Zuko still has the sweatdrop expression and proceeds to sit in front of Sokka) Uh, Zuko. Yes, (sits up) why would (chews the flower) I be expecting any one different? (He swallows the flower with a pained expression and coughs out some petals) So what's on your mind?
Zuko: Your sister, she hates me and I don't know why! But I do care what she thinks of me.
Sokka: Nah, she doesn't hate you. Katara doesn't hate anyone. (moves his hand across in an arc) Except maybe some people in the Fire Nation. (his eyes widen as he realizes what he just said) No, I mean, uh, not people who are good but used to be bad. (makes pacifying gestures with his hands) I mean, bad people. Fire Nation people who are so bad, who have never been good (places his arms in a X shape) and probably won't be ever! (opens it to the side)
Zuko: (interrupts) Stop. Okay, listen. I know this may seem out of no where, (Cut to a serious Zuko as the camera slowly zooms in) but I want you to tell me what happened to your Mother.
Sokka: (Cut to a stunned Sokka) What? Why would you want to know that?
Zuko: Katara mentioned it before when we were imprisoned together in Ba Sing Se and again just now when she was yelling at me. I think somehow... she's connected her anger about that to her anger at me.
Sokka: (looks to the side sadly) It's not a day I like to remember.

(Flashback to the blue sky as camera pans down to the village. Young Sokka raises his head out from a snow fort. A snowball enters the screen and hits his face. Cut to a young Katara who remains in a throwing stance and she starts to giggle. Cut to Sokka who heaves a huge snowball as big as his body. He prepares to throw it as he looks up. Black snow rains down on the village. He drops the snowball at his feet. Cut to an overhead view of the siblings as they look up. Camera slowly zooms out to show the other villagers starting up as well.)

Katara: I'm going to find Mum. (She runs past her brother. Sokka runs the other direction)
Sokka: (voiceover) Many of the warriors (Cut to 3 Fire Nation ships closing in on the village) have seen the black snow before (Cut to Sokka and a few other adult warriors armed with clubs who run towards the ship) and they knew what it meant. (Cut to a line of Fire Nation soldiers) A Fire Nation raid.

(The soldiers yell a battle cry. Cut back to the Water Tribe warriors who ready themselves. Cut to the bottom of the ship as the soldiers jump off their ships into the snow and stand up with their palms on fire. Cut to Hakoda and some other warriors who yell a battle cry as well and charge. Cut to the charging Fire Nation soldiers. Cut to Sokka who looks on behind the safety of another snow fort.)

Sokka: (Cut to the soldiers and warriors who begin to fight) We were badly outnumbered. (The warriors throw the soldiers off their feet before they start to firebend) But somehow, we managed to drive them off. (Cut to a soldier being thrown towards the place Sokka is hiding. His head gets stuck in the snow. Sokka throws snow on his back and uses the soldier's back as a stool to reach the ground. Cut to a boomerang on the ground as Sokka picks it up. He runs towards the ship but stops. The other warriors in the background stop as well.) As quickly as they came, (Cut to a back view of Sokka as the soldiers run back to their ships) they just left. (Cut back to Sokka who throws his boomerang. Fade back to present day Sokka.) I was so relieved when it was over but, that's because I didn't know yet what have
happened. (He lowers his head and composes himself) I didn't know we lost our Mother.
Zuko: Wait. Can you remember any details about the soldiers who raided your village Like, what the lead ship looked like?
Sokka: (Cut to Sokka as he thinks) Yeah... (Flashback to 3 red Fire Nation flags with raven symbols on them) Sea Ravens. The main ship had flags with sea ravens on them. (Cut to present day Zuko)
Zuko: The symbol of The Southern Raiders. Thanks, Sokka.
Sokka: No problem. (places an arm around Zuko's shoulder) Thanks for stopping by. (pushes the tent opening aside and shoves Zuko out and sighs) Thought he never leave. (hopeful, optimistic music plays as Sokka smiles and rubs his hands together and pushes the tent opening aside. Cut to the outside of the tent as his head pops out) Suki.

(Camera zooms out to show Zuko still outside his tent. Sokka looks at him and whistles as he retreats back into his tent. Zuko storms off. Scene changes to morning. Cut to Katara coming out of her tent. She looks at something in front of her tent and frowns. Cut to show Zuko sitting on a rock in front of her tent. He looks up sleepily.)

Katara: (Cut to a side view of the scene) You look terrible. (She >ignores him and rummages through her bag)
Zuko: (stands up and rubs his eyes) I waited out here all night. (Katara proceeds to comb her hair)
Katara: What do you want?
Zuko: (Cut to a close up of Katara with Zuko behind her) I know who killed your Mother. (she widens her eyes and stops combing) I'm going to help you find him.

(Cut to the back of Katara's head as she turns around with a shocked look on her face. The expression changes to seriousness. Camera slowly zooms in on her face. Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(Scene returns to an overhead view of Appa who seems to be grazing. Cut to Sokka who is fiddling with a necklace of flowers.)

Katara: I need to borrow Appa.

(Zuko follows behind her with his bag.)

Aang: (feeding Appa hay) Why? Is it your turn to take a little fieldtrip with Zuko?
Katara: Yes, it is.
Aang: (Cut to Aang who is surprised) Oh. What's going on?
Katara: We're going to find the man who took my Mother from me.

(Cut to a surprised Sokka as he lays the necklace aside and stands up.)

Zuko: (off screen) Sokka told me the story of what happened. I know who did it. And I know how to find him.
Aang: Umm... and what exactly do you think this would accomplish?
Katara: (sighs and shakes her head) I knew you wouldn't understand. (She begins to walk away)
Aang: (Cut to a close up of Katara as Aang and Sokka look on behind her) Wait, stop, I do understand. You're feeling unbelievable pain and rage. How do you think I felt about the sandbenders when they stole Appa? How do you think I felt about the Fire Nation when I found out what happened to my people?
Zuko: (off screen) She needs this, (everyone turn their eyes towards him) Aang. This is about getting closure and justice.
Aang: I don't think so. I think it's about getting revenge.
Katara: (off screen) Fine! (Cut to an angry and frustrated Katara) Maybe it is. Maybe that's what I need. Maybe that's what he deserves.
Aang: Katara, you sound like Jet.
Katara: (defensively) It's not the same. Jet attacked the innocent. This man, he's a monster.
Sokka: Katara, she was my Mother too. But I think Aang might be right.
Katara: Then you didn't love her the way I did.
Sokka: (speechless) Katara...
Aang: The monks used to say that revenge is like a two-headed ratviper. While you watch your enemy go down, you're being poisoned yourself.
Zuko: That's cute. But this isn't air temple pre-school. It's the real World.
Katara: (Camera zooms out to place Katara on screen) Now that I know he's out there, now that I know we could find him, I feel like I have no choice.
Aang: Katara, you do have a choice. Forgiveness.
Zuko: That's the same as doing nothing.
Aang: (shakes head) No it's not. It's easy to do nothing. (Camera slowly zooms in) But it's hard to forgive.
Katara: (Cut to Katara who looks on darkly) It's not just hard, it's impossible.

(She turns and walks away. Cut to an overhead shot of the scene as Zuko follows after her. Cut to nighttime and camera pans down from the Moon to the campsite. Cut to Katara in a black ninja-like outfit tying her hair. Aang & Sokka can be seen peering out from a rock behind her.)

Aang: (Aang & Sokka climb over the rock) So you were just going to take Appa anyway?
Katara: Yes.
Aang: It's okay, because I forgive you. (smiles< hopefully) That give you any ideas?
Katara: (Cut to a side view of the scene. Zuko is also wearing the same outfit as Katara and is packing his bag.) Don't try to stop us.
Aang: I wasn't planning to. This is a journey you need to take. You need to face this man. (Katara nods and she climbs on Appa's horn to his head) But when you do, please don't choose revenge. (Zuko throws his bag into the saddle) Let your anger out and then let it go. Forgive him.
Zuko: (Cut to Zuko who appears to be tired of his preaching) Okay, we'll be sure to do that guru-goody-goody. (He climbs aboard Appa)
Katara: (Cut to Katara looking down at Aang from Appa's head) Thanks for understanding Aang. Yip yip. (Appa takes off. Cut back to an area behind the guys as they look up at the departing bison)
Sokka: You know, you're pretty wise for a kid.
Aang: Thanks, Sokka.
Sokka: Usually it's annoying but right now, I'm just impressed.
Aang: (narrows his eyes) I appreciate that.
Sokka: So... can I borrow Momo for a week?
Aang: (turns his head towards Sokka rapidly) Why do you need Momo?

(Sokka shrugs and makes an "I don't know" noise. Cut to Katara on Appa. Cut to a side view of Appa flying past the Moon.)

Zuko: (off screen) We need to find the Fire Navy communication tower. (Cut to Zuko leaning on the saddle) All the navy's movements are coordinated by messenger hawk. And every tower has to be up to date on where everyone is deployed.
Katara: (off screen) So once (Cut to a communication tower in the middle of the ocean as the building slowly becomes bigger as they near it) we find the communication tower, we bust in and take the information we need.
Zuko: (off screen) Not exactly. (Appa flies into screen just above the water and it airbends with its tail to propel it forward. It displaces some water below.) We need to be stealthy (Cut to the communication tower as camera pans down to show the whole building structure and a bunch of rocks below) and make sure no one spots us. Otherwise, (Appa flies into screen and lands) they'll warn The Southern Raiders. Long before we reach them.

(Cut to the rocks as Katara and Zuko run out from behind them. She waterbends the water into a raft of ice and both of them jump on it. She proceeds to surf the raft. Cut to a side view of the scene as she creates a tall wave to bring the raft up to the tower and they jump off. Cut to a corridor of the tower as a door opens and 2 guards walk out. Cut to an overhead view of the guards as Katara and Zuko quickly sneak pass.

Cut to the back view of another guard writing at a desk. Camera slowly zooms out to show some gratings. Cut to Zuko and Katara looking through the gratings. Katara makes some waterbending movements. Cut to the guard's hand holding the paintbrush as the dish of ink spills onto her hand and the table. Cut to a close up of the guard who looks at her stained hands and leaves the table and room. Cut back to the duo in the air duct looking at the guard leave. Cut to Zuko and Katara in front of a shelf.)

Zuko: Okay,Southern Raiders. (He pulls out a black scroll and unrolls it on a table. It's a map a mountain terrain with 3 flags placed along some points in an inverted triangle.) There. (His finger points to the flag on the top right) On patrol near Whale Tail Island.
Katara: (Cut to Katara who furrows her brows in seriousness) Whale Tail Island, here we come.

(Fade to an overhead shot of Appa flying at day time. Cut to a sleeping Zuko in the saddle as he wakes up and looks up at Katara.)

Zuko: (Cut to a front shot of Katara with black circles under her eyes and holding Appa's reins tightly) You should get some rest. We'll be there in a few hours. You'll need all your strength.
Katara: Now, don't you worry about my strength. I have plenty. (Cut to a side view of Katara) I'm not the helpless little girl I was when they came.

(Camera pans to the right and fades back to the Water Tribe siblings looking up at the black snow.)

Katara: I'm going to find Mum.

(She runs past her brother just like in Sokka's flashback. Cut to an overhead view of the scene as several people run deeper into the village. Cut to Katara who runs back in as warriors run past her. Cut to the inside of a hut as the curtain is pushed aside by Katara.)

Katara: Mum!

(Cut to an area behind Katara's shoulder as Katara's mother is almost on her knees on the ground in front of a Fire Nation soldier. The soldier turns back and looks at Katara. Camera zooms in on Katara's face as her eyes almost tear up.)

Katara's Mum: (off screen) Just let her go and (Cut to Katara's Mum who pleads) I'll give you the information you want.
Fire Nation soldier: (Camera pans up to the soldier) You heard
your Mother, get out of here!
Katara: (Cut to an area behind her Mother's shoulder as Katara looks on, frightened) Mum, I'm scared.
Katara's Mum: (assuringly) Go find your Dad, sweetie. I'll handle this.

(Cut to a reluctant Katara who looks at the soldier. Cut to the soldier who stares down at her fiercely. Camera zooms in on the soldier's dark brown eye. Cut back to Katara who pushes the curtains aside and runs out of the house.)

Katara: (Cut to a desperate Katara running in the snow) I ran as fast as I could.

(She stops at the edge of a small hill and looks down.)

Katara: (shouts) Dad! Dad! (Camera pans down to show Hakoda throwing a firebending soldier hard into the snow.) Please, I think Mum's in trouble! There's a man in our house.

(Hakoda lets go of the soldier immediately)

Hakoda: Kya!

(He runs off. Cut to Katara and Hakoda's backs as the run back to their home. Camera zooms in on the curtain as Hakoda's gloved hand pushes the curtain aside. Camera fades to white and returns back to present day Katara.)

Katara: But, we were too late. When we got there, the man was gone. (voice cracks slightly) And so was she.
Zuko: (Cut to a sorrowful Zuko) Your Mother was a brave woman.
Katara: (Cut to a front shot of Katara as she touches her necklace) I know.

(Cut to a side view of Appa flying. Cut to an overhead shot of Appa flying at night. Zuko has taken over the reins and Katara is sleeping in the saddle. Cut to Zuko looking through a telescope.)

Zuko: There! (Katara's head pops up from the saddle) See those Sea Raven flags? (He throws the telescope to Katara. Cut to the inside of the telescope looking at a lone ship in the ocean. Cut to the Sea Raven flag.) It's The Southern Raiders.
Katara: (Cut to Katara bringing down the telescope) Let's do this.

(Cut to a side view of the ship as Appa comes into screen and enters the water. Cut to underwater with Appa having air bubble on his head. Cut to the under side of the boat as Appa swims to it. Cut to Katara waterbending. Cut to a group of Fire Nation soldiers gossiping idly on the deck.)

Soldier: So there I was and I was like, you know, you could...

(A stream of water coils round the guard and the others look on, stunned. He gets pulled into the water with a scream. The other soldiers run to the side of the ship to look. Cut back to underwater as Appa swims up to the other side of the ship. Cut to the surface of the water as Katara breaks through the surface first, followed shortly by Appa and Zuko.

Cut to a frontal shot of Appa as Katara waterbends to huge waves on both sides and sends it toward the ship. Cut to one of the soldiers hearing the noise and looking back. He grabs a neighbouring soldier's shoulder. Cut to a front shot of the ship as the wave slowly closes in. Cut to the deck as the soldiers get hit by the wave and are thrown into the ocean. Cut to the frontal shot of the ship again as Appa is seen flying onto the deck.

Cut to a lone soldier who managed to stay on deck as he stands up by holding the side of the ship. Appa lands noisily and he turns back. Cut to a close up side view shot of a charging Katara. She has tears in her eyes. Cut to soldier who firebends and is thrown overboard into the ocean by a tunnel of water. Cut to the water surface as the soldiers in the water look at the last remaining soldier on deck entering the water.

Cut to the corridor of the ship as the door opens and the duo rush in. Katara has bended water around her arms. A door opens and a soldier brandishing a sword pops out. Zuko grabs the soldier's arm and holds onto the sword as he pushes the soldier back into the storeroom. Cut to Zuko's point of view as the soldier hits a pile of stuff. His hand comes into screen and he closes the door and slides the sword in between the handles. Cut to Katara waiting for Zuko as they head deeper into the corridor. Cut to the floorboard and it pans up to a door and they stop in front of it.)

Zuko: This is it, Katara. Are you ready to face him?

(Cut to Katara as she pulls down her mask. Camera zooms out and Katara turns on the spot and bends the water towards the camera with a battle cry. Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(Scene returns to the other side of the door. Water seeps through the sides and the door bursts open to reveal Katara. Zuko enters the room quickly to dissipate some flames that enters the screen. Cut to show the assailant firebending at Zuko to no avail. Zuko sends a shot at the Captain's feet and the Captain jumps back towards the steering wheel. Cut to a close up of the Captain as he stares down at the blast.)

Captain: Who are you?
Zuko: (Cut to Zuko remaining in a stance and Katara looking on vehemently behind him) You don't remember her? You will soon. Trust me.

(Zuko firebends again. Cut to the Captain who moves to the side and breaks the flame. He proceeds to bend. Cut to a close up of the Captain with his arm out stretched. His arm starts to shake uncontrollably.)

Captain: What? (Zoom out on the Captain as his arm moves around wildly. He struggles and groans as he tries to contain it with his other arm. His arm drops to the floor and his body bends forward. His helmet falls off his head.) What's happening to me?

(Cut to a close up of Katara in a bloodbending stance, smiling. Camera zooms out to show Katara bringing down her arms and the Captain's body is brought to the floor. Cut to Zuko who is shocked at Katara's technique. Zoom out on the scene again as he narrows his eyes and looks down at the Captain.)

Zuko: Think back. Think back to your last raid on the Southern Water Tribe.
Captain: (Cut to the Captain who lays huddled on the floor) I don't know what you're talking about. Please, I don't know!
Zuko: (Camera zooms out to show Zuko kneeling near the Captain's head) Don't lie! You look her (points back to Katara) in the eye and you tell me you don't remember what you did.

(Cut to Katara who brings her arms up. Cut back to the Captain who is brought up to his knees. He looks back, frightened. Cut to a visibly angry Katara. Cut back to the scared Captain as his eyes shine in fear. Camera zooms in on the Captain's light brown eye. Cut back to Katara as her face softens in realization.)

Katara: (eyes widen in shock) It's not him. (Zoom out on the scene as Katara drops her hands. The Captain falls back to the floor. Cut back to Katara who looks back, somberly) He's not the man.
Zuko: (Cut back to Zuko) What?! What do you mean he's not? He's a leader of The Southern Raiders! (The Captains stirs behind him) He has to be the guy!

(Cut to Katara who turns and walks away. Cut back to the Captain as he struggles to his feet. Zuko pulls him by the arm and pushes him against the window in an arm lock.)

Zuko: If you're not the man we're looking for, who is?
Captain: (Cut back to the Captain's face pressed up against the glass) You must be looking for Yon Rha. He retired 4 years ago.

(Zuko turns his head and camera pans to a retreating Katara. Cut to a close up of Katara's determined face as her eyes brim with tears.

Scene changes to a valley with a house in the distance. Cut to a hand with a small hoe loosening the soil. Camera zooms out to reveal a man with graying hair kneeling on the dirt. Cut to a close up of the man as an elderly lady appears at the doorway in the house behind him.)

Old Lady: Yon Rha, you lazy piece of work, I need something.
Yon Rha: (stops his work and attempts to placate) Yes Mother, what is it?
Yon Rha's Mother: The tomato-carrot from your garden are too hard for my gums. I need something soft and juicy.
Yon Rha: (Cut to an area behind his Mother's hand looking at Yon Rha's back as he turns to face his Mum) Would you like something else from the garden? I would be happy to...
Yon Rha's Mother: (her fists clenches and she interrupts) Forget
your stupid garden! (Cut to a close up of his Mother who yells at him, irritatingly) Get your grimy hind to the market and buy me some real food!

(Cut to the flower bed as Yon Rha stands up. Cut to the back view of Yon Rha as he walks towards the town's entrance. Cut to some vegetables on display at a stall. Yon Rha enters the screen and picks out some food and places them in his basket. Cut to the inside of the house opposite the stall looking at Yon Rha. The wind chime in the window moves. Cut to Yon Rha who notices the chiming tune and turns towards the house. Cut to someone inside the house as he ducks down to avoid behind seen.)

Yon Rha: (Cut back to Yon Rha who looks on quizzically) Hello? (He turns to the stall owner) Did you see someone?

(The owner shakes his head. Cut to some houses on the slope. Camera pans down to some steps cut into the hill. Cut to a close up of Yon Rha as he walks down the steps. His eyes shift from side to side. Yon Rha stops and looks up.)

Yon Rha: Hello? (Cut to an area above Yon Rha as the camera pans down to show a person hiding away to avoid being spotted) Is someone there?

(Cut back to Yon Rha who frowns and walks on. Cut to Zuko and Katara who pop their heads up from their hiding spot.)

Katara: That was him. (Cut to Katara's eyes as they shine with hate) That was the monster.

(Cut to the ground as rain falls and the ground gets soaked. Camera pans up to show Yon Rha walking in the rain. Cut to the back view of Yon Rha as he turns around swiftly. He walks on. Cut to a side view of Yon Rha's face. His eye looks behind and he stops. Cut to the back view of Yon Rha again.)

Yon Rha: Nobody sneaks up on me (he drops his basket, turns and firebends) without being burned.

(Cut to a bush as a stream of fire enters the screen, setting it on fire. Cut back to Yon Rha as he loosens his stance and picks up his fallen groceries. Cut to a close up side view of Yon Rha as looks back. Camera pans down to a trip wire on the ground as he walks on. His legs gets caught in the fire and he falls down, face first into a puddle of water. Fire enters the screen and Yon Rha quickly moves backwards. He looks up. Cut to Zuko's boot as the camera pans up to reveal Zuko in a firebending stance.)

Zuko: We weren't behind the bush. (Cut to a side view of the confrontation as Zuko takes a step forward to threaten Yon Rha.)
And I wouldn't try firebending again.
Yon Rha: (Cut to Yon Rha on the ground with his arm shielding his face) Whoever you are, take my money. Take whatever you want, I'll cooperate.

(Cut to an area behind Yon Rha as Katara walks in behind Zuko. Cut to a close up of Katara as she pulls down her face mask.)

Katara: Do you know who I am?
Yon Rha: (Cut back to Yon Rha) No, (his eyes widen in fear) I'm not sure.
Katara: Oh you better remember me like your life depends on it! (Yon Rha places his arm in front of his face) Why don't you take a closer look.
Yon Rha: Yes, yes. I remember you now. (Cut back to Katara) You're the little Water Tribe girl.

(A flash of lightning darkens Katara's face and the screen turns to white and fades back to young Katara who has just entered her house.)

Kya: (off screen) Just let her go and (Camera zooms out to show Kya kneeling on the floor in front of Yon Rha) I'll give you the information you want.
Yon Rha: (Cut to Yon Rha looking down at Katara) You heard your Mother, get out of here!
Katara: (Katara holds her hands together) Mum, I'm scared.
Kya: (Cut back to Kya) Go find your Dad, sweetie. I'll handle this.

(Cut to the outside of the house as Katara pushes the curtain aside and runs out. The curtain parts open widely to show Yon Rha and Kya looking on at the fleeing girl.)

Yon Rha: (Cut back to the inside of the house) Now, tell me. Who is it? Who's the waterbender?
Kya: There are no waterbenders here. (frowns) The Fire Nation took them all away a long time ago.
Yon Rha: (Cut to Kya's point of view as she looks up at Yon Rha) You're lying. My source says there's one waterbender left in The Southern Water Tribe. (Yon Rha walks closer) We're not leaving until we find the waterbender.
Kya: (Cut to Kya) If I tell you, do you promise (she lowers her head and closes her eyes to make a decision) to leave the rest of the village alone? (Cut to a side view of Yon Rha as he nods his head and makes a
"Hmm" sound.) It's me. (Cut to Kya who looks up) Take me as your prisoner.
Yon Rha: (Cut to a close up of Yon Rha who smiles evilly) I'm afraid I'm not taking prisoners today.

(Fade to present day Yon Rha who gulps. Cut to a side view of the scene. Lightning lights up the sky once again.)

Katara: She lied to you. (Cut to a close up of Katara as she closes her eyes sadly) She was protecting the last waterbender.
Yon Rha: (surprised) What? Who?
Katara: (Cut back to Katara who opens her eyes and looks back furiously) ME!

(Camera zooms out as Katara brings out her arms. Rain drops get suspended in the air immediately.. Cut to Yon Rha who looks on, dumbfounded. Cut to Zuko as he looks up at the accumulating rain drops and pulls down his face mask. Camera zooms out to show a rapidly increasing dome of water over them. Cut back to Katara. She moves her arms around and the water gets bended in a huge blob and she lets out a battle cry as she directs the water towards Yon Rha. Cut to the water as they turn into ice spikes. Cut to Yon Rha as the camera rapidly zooms in on him. He shields himself with his arms and lets out a cowering noise. He brings his arms down and he looks up.

Cut to a side view of Yon Rha as the ice spikes pause inches in front of him. A couple of ice spikes puncture the ground beside him. Camera slowly pans out to show the hovering mass of ice spikes. Cut to Katara who lowers her hands. Cut back to Yon Rha who covers his head as the spikes turn into water and fall to the ground.)

Yon Rha: (Cut to a side view of Yon Rha as he kneels) I did a bad thing. I know I did and you deserve revenge. So why don't you take my Mother? That would be fair.
Katara: (Cut to Katara who looks on, pityingly) I always wonder what kind of person could do such a thing. But now that I see you, I think I understand. (She walks forward) There's just nothing inside you. Nothing at all. You're pathetic and sad and empty.
Yon Rha: (Cut to Yon Rha as he pleads) Please spare me.
Katara: (Cut to a visibly angry Katara) But as much as I hate you... (Her eyes start to shimmer with emotion) I just can't do it.

(She closes her eyes as she controls her feelings. Cut to Yon Rha who cowers and smiles weakly on the spot. Cut to a side view of Katara as Zuko walks into screen, looking at Katara as she walks off. He looks at Yon Rha. Cut to Yon Rha who lowers his head in shame. Cut back to Zuko who turns back to follow Katara as Yon Rha cowers out loud off screen. Cut to Yon Rha and his fallen vegetables as he continues to sob.

Cut to Fire Lord Ozai's beach house in Ember Island. Camera slowly zooms in on the port. Cut to the port as Katara sits near the edge. Appa flies into screen. Cut to a close up of Katara's shoes as she kicks the water. Camera pans up to show Katara with her eyes closed. Cut to a frontal shot of Katara as she opens her eyes and stares into the distance sadly. The sound of rapid running is heard.)

Aang: (off screen) Katara! (Camera pans up to show Aang and Zuko approaching her) Are you okay?
Katara: (Cut to Katara's back) I'm doing fine.
Aang: (Cut to a frontal shot of Katara with the boys behind her as the camera pans up) Zuko told me what you did. (He rubs his head) Or... what you didn't do, I guess. I'm proud of you.
Katara: I wanted to do it. I wanted to take out all my anger at him but, I couldn't. (closes her eyes sadly) I don't know if it's because I'm too weak to do it or if it's because I'm strong enough not to.
Aang: (off screen) You did the right thing. (Cut to a side view of the port) Forgiveness is the first step you have to take to begin healing. (Katara stands up and walks towards Aang)
Katara: (Cut to a frontal shot of a serious and still angry Katara) But I didn't forgive him. I'll never forgive him. (Her face softens as she looks up at Zuko) But I am (Camera pans to show Zuko's back as Aang turns his head towards his teacher) ready to forgive you.

(Cut to a side view of Zuko as Katara walks into screen. She pauses and then throws herself into Zuko's arms in a hug. They part after a while as she lays a hand on Zuko's shoulder in a gesture of thanks and walks off. Zuko turns and looks on. Cut to Katara's back as she walks towards Appa. Sokka is seen waiting for his sister at the side of the bison.)

Zuko: (off screen) You were right about what Katara needed.(Cut to Zuko and Aang who smiles) Violence wasn't the answer.
Aang: It never is.
Zuko: Then I have a question for you. (He turns towards Aang and the camera cuts to a close up of Zuko) What are you going to do when you face my Father?

(Cut to Aang who is stunned at the question and looks to the side, unsure and confused. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence, including clips from "The Beach" and "The Day of Black Sun, Part 1: The Invasion".]



Act I

(Episode opens up to a scenic view of Fire Lord Ozai's beach house with the rocks and hills around it on Ember Island. Cut to an overhead view of the courtyard as 2 figures are seen firebending towards a derelict fountain and taking a step back. Cut to an area at Aang's side, looking at him and Zuko. In sync, they take a step forward and throw their arms down, firebending at the same time. They stretch out their right leg in front of them, firebending again. They proceed to stretch it behind them and they push out their left arm out in a "Superman" pose as they firebend with that arm. They put their legs down and exhale audibly, putting their arms in a cooling down position and bowing to each other. Katara and Toph are seen spectating at the side in their Fire Nation disguises. Zuko cracks his fingers and stretches both arms above his head and walks off screen. Aang massages his shoulder.)

Katara: (Cut to a close up of the 2 girls. Toph is napping.) Doesn't it seem kinda weird that we're hiding (looks around the courtyard) from the Fire Lord in his own house?
Zuko: (Cut to Zuko sitting at the fountain, wiping his hair with a yellow towel) I told you, my Father hasn't come here since our family was actually happy. And that was a long time ago. This is the last place anyone would think to look for us.
Sokka: (Cut to an area behind the girls looking at the boys as Sokka and Suki walk into screen) You guys are not going to believe this. There's a play about us.
Suki: (Cut to a close up of the couple. Suki has donned a Fire Nation disguise similar to Azula's evening outfit in The Beach) We were just in town and we found this poster.

(Sokka unveils the poster at the camera. It's a parody of the Season 1 box set DVD cover and Zuko's scar is on the wrong side.)

Katara: (Cut to an area behind Sokka as he shows the poster to his sister) What? (He shows the poster to Aang) How is that possible?
Sokka: (He flips the poster back) Listen to this. (Cut to a frontal shot of Sokka with the back of the poster facing the camera) "The Boy in the Iceberg is a new production from acclaimed playwright Pu On Tim who scoured (Cut to the poster as camera pans up on the main characters with heavily exaggerated features. Sokka is pictured as a muscled man in his Season 2 outfit) the globe gathering information on the Avatar from the icy South Pole to the heart of Ba Sing Se. (Cut to an overhead shot of the scene) His sources including singing nomads, pirates, prisoners of war and a surprisingly knowledgeable merchant of cabbage."
Suki: (leans in to read the last line) "Brought to you by the critically acclaimed Ember Island Players."

(Sokka lets go of the scroll's bottom and it curls back.)

Zuko: Ugh. (Cut to a close up of Zuko with a disgusted look on his face) My Mother used to take us to see them. They butchered "Love Amongst The Dragons" every year.
Katara: (Cut to a close up side shot of Katara as she turns back to her brother) Sokka, do you really think it's a good idea for us to attend a play about ourselves?
Sokka: Come on, a day at the theatre? (Unrolls the scroll towards his sister) This is the kind of wacky time wasting nonsense I've been missing.

(He grins widely. Fade to a side view shot of the theatre at night. Cut to the curtains on the stage. Camera zooms out to show the Gaang walking into a private viewing box on the second floor facing the stage. Toph and Katara take their seats. Zuko walks in the opposite direction wearing a hooded cloak and sits beside Katara as Aang confidently tries to sit next to her. He is wearing a hat similar to Dock's in The Painted Lady to cover his bald, tattooed head. Aang stands up rubs his neck.)

Aang: Hey, uh... I wanted to sit (points at Zuko's spot) there. (he clenches his hands together)
Zuko: (lowers his hood) Just sit next to me, what's the big deal?
Aang: I was (Katara looks at the commotion and looks back to the stage) just... I wanted to... (sits next to Zuko) Okay.
Toph: (Cut to an undershot of the viewing box as Sokka and Suki sit in the row behind the 4 of them) Why are we sitting in the nose bleed section? My feet (the lights in the theatre dim down) can't see a thing from up here.
Katara: Don't worry, I'll tell your feet what's happening.

(Cut to the stage as the curtain is drawn up to reveal a prop of a canoe surrounded by moving set decorations of water. The backdrop is a crude painting of icebergs. The Katara and Sokka actors are rowing the canoe with their oars. Cut to Katara who is excited. A hand touches her shoulder and she looks up, smiling at her brother and the camera zooms out as Sokka points to her and back to himself rapidly. He makes sounds of astonishment. Cut to Katara's actress who is much more developed and bigger sized than the real Katara and her clothes are a little revealing. She has too much blusher on her cheeks.)

Actress Katara: (sighs) Sokka, my only brother. We constantly roam these icy South Pole seas and yet never do we find anything fulfilling.
Actor Sokka: (Camera pans to the right to show Sokka's actor who is buck-toothed and thinner than the actual Sokka. His "wolf-tail" is an overly large ponytail bun.) All I want is a full feeling in my stomach, I'm starving!

(Cut to the audience near the stage as they laugh heartily. Cut to a sideview of the Water Tribe siblings who look at each other in disbelief. Cut to an area in the audience in front of the stage, looking at the boat.)

Actress Katara: Is food the only thing on your mind?
Actor Sokka: Well, I'm trying to get it out of my mind and (Cut to a close up of actor Sokka as he points to his mouth) into my mouth. I'm starving.

(The audience laughs once again. Cut back to the Gaang's viewing box as Sokka complains to his sister.)

Sokka: This is pathetic. My (points his thumb to himself) jokes are way funnier than this. (throws out his arm towards the stage)
Toph: (Toph laughs and the siblings look at her) I think he's got you pegged.

(Cut back to the stage as actress Katara stands up while actor Sokka continues paddling.)

Actress Katara: Everyday, the World awaits a beacon to guide us, yet none appears. Still, we cannot give up hope. (she places her hand to her chest in a melodramatic way) For hope (she sniffles) is all we have (her voice begins to be choked with "tears") and we must never relinquish it. Even... (sniffling) even to our dying breath.

(She pretends to cry.)

Katara: (Cut back to the Gaang's viewing box as Katara is unamused) Well, (Suki and Sokka laugh) that's just silly. I don't sound like that.
Toph: (giggles and clutches her stomach) Oh man, this writer's a genius.

(Cut back to actress Katara who is still crying as white-blue light illuminates behind her. She looks up in a "dainty" way.)

Actress Katara: (Cut to a full view of the stage as the iceberg prop slowly moves to the centre of the stage. A cut out of Aang sways from side to side on a stick inside the iceberg.) It appears to be someone frozen in ice. Perhaps for a hundred years.
Actor Sokka: (Cut to a close up of the cut out.) But who? Who is the boy in the iceberg?

(Cut back to the viewing box as Aang grabs the railings in anticipation. Zuko looks bored.)

Actress Katara: (Cut to actress Katara who is already on top of the iceberg prop. Actor Sokka is still climbing up) Waterbend, hai-ya!

(She performs a chopping motion and the Aang cut out is pulled down. Cracks appear on the iceberg and it opens with the interior smoking. The actors look at each other in mock surprise. Cut to a close up of the smoke as a lady dressed as Aang jumps out, winks and poses. Like actress Katara, her make up is heavy. Cut to Aang who is repulsed. Cut back to a close up of the iceberg.)

Actress Katara: Who are you, frozen boy?
Actress >Aang: (giggles and balances tip toed on one leg) I'm the Avatar, silly. Here to spread (pirouettes on her balancing leg) joy and fun.
Aang: (in disbelief) Wait, is that a woman playing me?

(Cut back to the iceberg as a shaggy, white Chinese lion get-up from traditional Chinese lion dances pops out from the remnants of the iceberg and moves from side to side. It jumps off the iceberg. Cut to a full view of the stage as the Appa lion circles round the iceberg and makes a gruff animal noise. The 3 dancers controlling the lion costume have worn shaggy pants to show that Appa has 6 legs.)

Actress Katara: (gasp) An airbender. My heart is so full of hope that it's (drops to her knees) making me (grabs actress Aang's leg and cries) tearbend.

(Cut to a close up of actress Katara as she makes sobbing noises. Cut back to a full view of the 3 actors on the iceberg prop.)

Actor Sokka: My stomach is so empty that it's making me tearbend. (He drops to his knees and grabs actress Aang's other leg and sobs) I need meat. (Cut to a close up of actor Sokka)
Actress Aang: (She kneels down and places an arm around actor Sokka's shoulder and points to the ceiling above the audience) But wait. (Cut back to Aang who is visibly unamused and is slumped against the railing) Is that a platter of meaty dumplings?
Actor Sokka: (off screen) Ooo. (Cut back to the 3 actors as actor Sokka looks around) Where? Where?
Actress Aang: (giggles uncontrollably) Did I mention (crosses her legs) that I'm an incurable prankster?

(Cut back to the Gaang's viewing box as the audience laughs off screen.)

Aang: (irritated) I don't do that. That's not what I'm like! And... I'm not a woman!
Toph: (laughs out loud as the rest turn to look at her) Oh, they nailed you, Twinkle Toes.

(Aang slumps onto the railing again. Cut back to the stage as Zuko's ship enters with actor Zuko poised near the front of the ship, looking through a telescope.)

Actor Uncle: (Cut to actor Uncle who is portrayed a little more accurately) Prince Zuko, you must try this cake.

(He brings up a whole cake on a plate but one slice missing.)

Actor Zuko: (Camera pans to the right to show actor Zuko in Zuko's Fire Nation armor with a long ponytail. His scar is on the wrong side.) I don't have time to stuff my face. (His voice is rougher and deeper than Zuko's. He lowers the telescope and faces the audience) I must capture the Avatar to regain my honor!
Actor Uncle: (Cut to a full view of the ship prop) Well, while you do that, maybe I'll capture another slice.

(He proceeds to bring the plate of cake to his mouth and makes loud, masticating noises)

Actor Zuko: You sicken me. (He looks through the telescope again)
Zuko: (Cut back to Zuko with Katara looking very amused) They make me
totally stiff and humorless.
Katara: Actually, I think that actor's pretty spot on.
Zuko: (looks to Katara and stretches both arms out) How could you say that?
Actor Uncle: (Cut back to actor Zuko still looking through the telescope as actor Uncle appears behind him) Let's forget about the Avatar and get massages.
Actor Zuko: (turns back to actor Uncle, outraged) How could you say that?!

(Cut back to Katara wearing a satisfied grin on her face and she looks to an expressionless Zuko as he slouches in his seat.

Cut to the backdrop of the Southern Air Temple as the camera pans down to actress Aang looking around. A tail sticks out from a nearby bush prop. She spots the tail.)

Actress Aang: Hey look, (the tail slinks deeper into the bush) I think (she tip toes towards the bush and reaches in. Cut the Water Tribe actors as they look at each other, puzzled.) I found something. (Cut to actress Aang who steps away from the bush with a large puppet of Momo sitting on her shoulder) It's a flying rabbit monkey. I think (she walks closer to the camera) I'll name him, Momo. (giggles)
Puppet Momo: (Actress Aang attempts ventriloquism but fails since one side of her mouth is open) Hi, everybody. (the mouth of puppet Momo opens and closes as it moves towards the camera) I love you.

(The audience laughs off screen as the camera cuts back to Aang who sighs with disgust and places two fingers on his temple, moving the skin around. Cut to actress Suki peeking out from behind a fan. Camera zooms out to show her holding 2 fans in her hands as she raises them above her head. Her head gear and the area around her waist are exaggeratedly big.)

Actor Sokka: (He walks backwards into screen, sticking his rear end out as he does so) Does this dress make my butt look fat?

(He points to his bottom. Cut to an area behind Suki and Sokka as Suki struggles to contain her laughter and looks to Sokka who blushes.

Cut to a backdrop of Omashu as actor Bumi in a bodysuit pops into screen.)

Actor Bumi: Riddles and challenges must you face, (Camera zooms out to the stage to show actress Aang avoiding a swinging rock and actress Katara being surrounded by props of green genemite crystals) if you are ever to leave this place.

(Sokka runs on stage, being chased by someone wearing a Flopsie suit. Actor Bumi laughs hysterically. Cut to actress Katara who sighs melodramatically as she disappears behind the prop crystals as one part of the prop rises, hiding her completely. Cut to Katara who sticks her tongue out at the scene.

Cut to the stage with a pirate ship in the backdrop. The leading characters stand at the centre of the stage. Cut to the left side of the stage as 3 pirates armed with prop weapons appear on stage. Camera pans to the other side of the stage as another 3 pirates enter the stage. Camera pans back to the trio with actress Katara clutching an overly large scroll prop and actor Sokka holding a blunt boomerang prop.

All 3 of them squat down as the pirates ambush them. The 3 of them slide out from underneath a pirate's skirt as the 6 pirates fight and slowly move offstage.)

Actor Sokka: Why did you have to steal that waterbending scroll?

(Cut to the trio who tip toe away.)

Actress Katara: It just gave me so much hope!

(Cut to Katara who looks on, unamused as actress Katara sobs off screen. Cut to a stagehand hiding behind the backdrop as lightning flashes through the stage. He lifts up a metal sheet and wobbles it around to make the sound of thunder. Cut to a full view of the stage to show actress Aang being tied to a raised dragon platform with Fire Nation guards at the bottom.)

Actor Zuko: The Avatar is mine! (he looks to the side and points) Wait, who's coming?
Actor Blue Spirit: (Cut to the side of the stage as a spotlight shines on an actor wearing a large tiki Blue Spirit mask that covers his whole body) I am the Blue Spirit. The scourge (clashes his broadswords together) of the Fire Nation here to save the Avatar.

(Cut to a full view of the stage as actor Blue Spirit appears on screen and waves his swords about. The guards behind him fall to the ground, defeated. Actor Zuko runs behind the dragon platform. Actor Blue Spirit continues walking on and waves his swords about and the remaining guards drop down. Actor Zuko appears from the other side of the platform and throws a red streamer symbolizing firebending at the Blue Spirit's feet and the Blue Spirit jumps to avoid the streamer. The Blue Spirit thrusts out his sword as actor Zuko runs offstage.)

Actress Aang: My hero.

(She jumps off the platform and sits on top of the tiki mask and the Blue Spirit walks offstage. Cut to Zuko and Aang who look at each other with slight "sweatdrop" expressions. Cut to the stagehand turning a wheel. Cut to the backdrop of the Freedom Fighter's hide out as actress Katara and actor Jet with a rose in his mouth and a heavily exaggerated anime-like hair are lowered into screen by on a platform. Actress Katara mock sobs out loud.)

Actor Jet: Don't cry, baby. (He holds actress Katara close to him) Jet will wipe out that nasty town (points to the stage) for you.

(He tips actress Katara's chin up and the camera zooms out to show a stagehand clad in black pulling a large, blue sheet of cloth symbolizing water across the stage. The platform raises.)

Actress Katara: (sultrily) Oh Jet, you're so bad.

(Cut to Toph who giggles while Katara holds her head in embarrassment. Cut to a prop of Appa flying across the stage with the leading actors sitting in the saddle. Actress Aang sits on the saddle's side instead of prop Appa's head.)

Actress Aang: (enthusiastically) Look, (points down) it's The Great Divide. (Actress Katara looks down) The biggest
canyon in the Earth Kingdom.
Actor Sokka: (looks down and throws his arm to the side dismissively) Meh. Let's keep flying.

(Cut to the stagehand holding a sack of fake snow and ruffling it so that the fake snowflakes fall out consistently. Cut to a bridge with a wave symbol on stage. Actor Sokka and actress Yue are standing at the centre of the bridge.)

Actor Sokka: Don't go, Yue. You're (grasps her hands) the only woman whose ever taken my mind off of food. (Cut to a close up of the 2 as they kiss audibly. Actress Yue has an overly large and exaggerated white hair wig and she is wearing pink instead of white. Actor Sokka gags and sticks his tongue out.) Wait, did you have pickled fish for dinner?
Actress Yue: Goodbye, Sokka. (She rises slowly as their hands part.) I have important Moon duties to take care of. (Cut to a full view of the bridge to show actress Yue sitting on a crescent Moon prop as it slowly gets pulled up. The train of her skirt is quite long and trails a few feet below the Moon prop.) And yes, I did have pickled fish.

(Actor Sokka raises his arms up to the departing Yue. Cut back to Sokka and Suki. Sokka has tears in his eyes and his hands are on his chin.)

Suki: (giggles) You never (Sokka's mouth quivers animatedly) told me you made out with the Moon Spirit.
Sokka: (places a finger on Suki's lips) Shh. I'm trying to watch.

(He lets the tears flow freely as Suki crosses her arms, annoyed. Cut to cut outs of Fire Nation boats being dragged across the stage. A foot kicks the cut outs aside. Cut to a doll of Zhao in the hand of the Ocean Spirit. Camera zooms out to show actress Aang under a large Ocean Spirit costume.)

Actress Aang: (laughs) The Avatar is back to save the day! Yay!

(She jumps and crushes the cut out as she lands. She proceeds to kick another ship cut out offstage. She stomps around and destroys the remaining cut outs as she falls flat on her stomach due to the weight of the costume. The curtain is lowered.

Cut back to the Gaang's viewing box as Toph and the rest of the audience applaud and cheer. Katara stares bewildered at the closing scene. Aang groans and throws his entire body forward. Zuko brings the hood up on his head. Sokka brings his palm to his face, visibly displeased.

Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(Scene returns to outside the theatre looking at the sea. Camera pans to the left to show the Gaang sitting on a flight of steps on a balcony. Sokka walks down the steps.)

Zuko: So far, this intermission is the best part of the play.
Sokka: (Cut to Sokka's legs walking down as Suki look on, amused) Apparently, the playwright thinks I'm an idiot (he sits down and reaches into a small bag of food) who tells bad jokes about meat all the time. (he takes out strip of meat)
Suki: Yeah, you tell bad jokes (Sokka bites off a part of the strip and chews) about plenty of other topics.
Sokka: (swallows) I know! (takes another bite angrily)
Aang: (off screen) At least this Sokka actor kinda looks like you. (Cut to Aang sitting at the bottom of the steps with Toph standing in front of him) That woman playing the Avatar doesn't resemble me at all.
Toph: I don't know, you are more in touch with your feminine side than most guys. (He stands up and makes an annoyed sound)
Katara: (off screen) Relax, Aang. (he turns around and camera cuts to Katara sitting at the top of the steps) They're not accurate portrayals. It's not like I'm (places hand on chest) a preachy crybaby who can't resist giving overemotional speeches about hope all the time. (Camera zooms out to show a full view of the stairs at everyone looks at her skeptically) What?
Aang: Yeah. (sits down) That's not you at all.
Toph: Listen, friends. It's obvious that the playwright did his research. I know it must hurt but what you're seeing up there on that stage is the truth.

(Cut back to the stage to show a backdrop of the Earth Kingdom. Camera pans down on the lead actors.)

Actress Katara: Well, here we are in the Earth Kingdom.
Actress Aang: I better (she opens a mini glider prop in her hand) have a look around to see if I can find an earthbending teacher. (A rope attached to her back pulls her up)
Toph: (excitedly) This is it! This must be where I (Zuko brings a parchment closer to his face while Katara looks on worriedly and Sokka appears bored) come in.

(Cut to actress Aang who flies one round above the audience and back to the stage)

Actress Aang: I flew all over town but I couldn't find a single earthbending master. (Actress Katara and actor Sokka act horrified and sad)
Toph: (clenches her fist in anticipation) Here it comes.
Actor Toph: (Cut to the stage as a rock prop gets lifted by a well built man wearing Toph's outfit who appears from a trap door under the prop) You can't find an earthbending master in the sky, you have to look underground.

(He throws the rock prop over the leading trio's heads. Cut back to the Gaang's viewing box as everyone breaks into laughter. Zuko drops his parchment in shock.)

Actress Aang: (points to actor Toph) Who are you?
Actor Toph: (spits off camera) My name is Toph because it sounds like tough. (He flexes his muscles) And that's just what I am. (Cut to Toph who turns her head to side, straining to hear the words.)
Toph: Wait a minute, (She uses her pinkie to clear her ear) I sound like... (shocked) a guy. A really buff guy. (She smiles)
Katara: (Camera pans to the right to show Katara who attempts to make fun of Toph) Well Toph, what you hear up there is the truth. It hurts, doesn't it?
Toph: (grins from ear to ear) Are you kidding me? (Katara appears annoyed at the revelation) I wouldn't have cast it any other way. At least it's not a flying bald lady.

(Camera pans further to the right to show Aang who is irritated at her comment. Cut back to the backdrop of the stage as camera pans down.)

Actress Aang: So, you're blind?

(She waves her hands in front of actor Toph's face.)

Actor Toph: (laughs) I can see you doing that. (points to actress Aang) I see everything (Cut to a full view of the stage) that you see except that I don't see like you do. I release (Cut to a frontal shot of actor Toph) a sonic wave from my mouth.

(He turns towards the leading trio and screams. Cut to actor Toph's face. Cut to the trio who lean back and their clothes flutter from the strong vibrations. Cut to the audience who cringe and cover their ears. Cut to the Gaang who are also cringing but Toph looks on happily. Cut back to the stage as actor Toph stops and turns back to the audience.)

Actor Toph: There. (The leading trio look on, impressed) I got a pretty good look at you.

(The audience applauds. Cut to the stagehand tilting a spotlight up. Cut to actor Uncle and actor Zuko standing on a bridge facing each other as the light casts huge shadows on the backdrop.)

Actor Uncle: Zuko, it's time we had a talk. (points to actor Zuko) About your hair. (Cut to a close up of actor Zuko with a long hair wig. Both of them are still wearing their Season 1 outfits.) It's gone too far.
Actor Zuko: Maybe it's best if we... (He turns his head away) split up.

(He turns and walks away. Cut to a full view of the bridge to show both of them walking away from each other. Cut to an area above the Gaang's viewing box looking at the stage. It's the scene from The Chase where the 6 of them corner Azula.)

Actor Zuko: Azula! My sister. What are you doing here?
Actress Azula: (Cut to a close up of actress Azula with pink torso armor instead of red and like the other female actresses, she has heavy eye makeup) You caught me. Wait. What's that? (points to the ceiling above the audience) I think it's your honor. (Camera zooms out to show a full view of the stage)
Actor Zuko: (All 6 actors turn towards the audience as actress Azula opens a door and escapes) Where?
Actress Katara: (They turn back to the empty corner) She escaped. But how?

(Cut to a stagehand sitting on a stool in the dark turning a contraption above him. The sheets around him move as he does so. Cut to alternating dark and light slanted lines moving across the screen. Camera zooms out to show the drill prop drilling through a prop wall supported by the black clad stagehands. Actress Azula stands on top of the drill while actress Aang stands on top of the wall.)

Actress Aang: If she continues drilling (the prop drill continues to penetrate in), this wall (Cut to actress Aang as the wall beneath her shakes and sways unsteadily) will come down for sure.

(A black clad hand brings up a rock prop from behind actress Aang and she takes it, throwing it towards actress Azula.)

Actress Azula: (Cut to actress Azula who swipes the rock prop away with her arm) Haha, yes! Continue drilling. (points towards the wall) The city (Camera zooms out to show the black clad stagehand fanning to create a smoky effect. The other stagehand continues to shake the wall) of Ba Sing Se can't hide no longer.

(Camera zooms out to show a full view of the stage once again. The drill continues penetrating the wall. Actress Aang continues to throw rocks provided by the stagehand. One of the rocks hits actress Azula but she blocks it. Cut to the audience who are either sleeping, yawning or just plain uninterested at the scene. Some of them struggle to stay awake. Cut to a backdrop of a prison door in Ba Sing Se with the green spooky glow.

Actor Jet comes into screen, slashing his hooksword arm prop as he does so. He is wearing a pair of crazy eye glasses as the tiny black beads representing his pupils swirl around to show that he has gone insane. Actor Jet twirls around on the spot, swinging his arms around.)

Actress Aang: (off screen) No, Jet! (Camera zooms out to show the actors appearing horrified and scared at the scene. Actor Jet is crouching like a primate and he has a slight pot belly.) What did they do to you?
Actor Jet: Must. (He swipes his hooksword arm towards actress Aang unsteadily) Serve. Earth King! (He turns and swipes Sokka who ducks) Must... Destroy!

(Cut to a stagehand on top looking down at the scene as he throws down a rock prop. Actor Jet makes various agonizing noises off screen. Cut to a full view of the stage as actor Jet swings around violently and grabs his head as if he is having a fit. The rock prop slowly floats into stage. Actor Jet crawls on his knees to ensure that he is underneath the rock prop as it lands. The prop falls on him, covering the upper part of his body but his legs pop out from under the rock. Actor Jet brings his legs into the prop. Cut to the Gaang's viewing box.)

Zuko: Did Jet just... die?
Sokka: You know, it was really unclear.

(Cut to actress Katara with a backdrop of the crystal catacombs of Ba Sing Se behind her.)

Actress Katara: I have to admit, Prince Zuko. I really find you attractive.

(Cut to a frontal shot of the stage to show actor Zuko sitting on a crystal prop with his legs crossed.)

Actor Zuko: You don't (actress Katara cringes at his harshness) have to make fun of me.
Actress Katara: But I mean it. (Sheproceeds to sit down beside actor Zuko) I had eyes for you (Cut to Katara and Zuko who look at each other awkwardly and they slide away from each other) since the day you first captured me. (Cut to Aang who frowns and looks serious)
Actor Zuko: (Cut to Aang's back view as he grabs the railings, looking at the stage) Wait. (actor Zuko stands up) I thought you were the Avatar's girl.

(Cut to a close up shot of Aang who nods. Cut to a slight overhead view of the 2 actors on stage.)

Actress Katara: (laughs) The Avatar? (stands up and walks towards actor Zuko) Why, he's like a little brother to me. (laughs some more) I certainly don't think (Cut to Aang who looks saddened and his eyes turns towards Katara) of him in a romantic way. Besides, (Cut back to the stage) how could he ever find out about this.

(The actors hold each others' hands in an embrace. Cut back to Aang who stands up in irritation.)

Sokka: (whispers) Oh, you're getting up? Can you get me some fire flakes? (He lays his arm across Suki's shoulder as she rests against him) Oh and (He releases his arm to whisper back as Suki appears irritated at the sudden gesture) fire gummies.

(He lays his arm on Suki's shoulder again as Suki looks up at him, rather annoyed. Cut to the stage with actor Zuko in the centre, actress Azula on the left with a Fire Nation banner behind her and actor Uncle on the right with an Earth Kingdom banner behind him. A spotlight shines on actor Zuko.)

Actress Azula: Well, my brother. What's it going to be? (Cut to a close up of actor Zuko has he makes several gestures of confusion and deep thought) Your nation or a life of treachery?
Actor Uncle: (Cut to actor Uncle who drinks from a bowl) Choose treachery, it's more fun.

(He does a thumbs-up. Cut to an overhead view of the stage as actor Zuko walks to actor Uncle. The spotlight follows him.)

Actress Azula: No way!

(Cut to an area behind actor Uncle as actor Zuko shoves him. Cut to a full view of the stage as actor Uncle drops his bowl of beverage and lands on his back like an upturned turtle. Actor Zuko walks towards actress Azula.)

Actor Zuko: I hate you, (points to actor Uncle) Uncle. (actor Uncle sits up) You smell and I hate you for all time.

(The "Fire siblings" walk offstage as the Earth Kingdom banner falls on top of actor Uncle. Cut to the Gaang's viewing box as Katara covers her mouth in shock. Zuko leans on the railing somberly.)

Katara: You didn't really say that, did you?
Zuko: (turns his head away) I might as well have.

(Cut back to the stage as actress Mai stands up from the smoke. Her outfit is mostly accurate but she has a passive smiley as her belt buckle and her hair buns are exaggeratedly large with a knife in each of them. She takes a knife from her hair and thrusts it out. A black clad stagehand carries it across the stage to hit the back of an actor Earth Kingdom soldier's shirt and he gets pulled back by a wire to show that the impact of the knife threw him backwards.

Camera zooms out to a full view of the stage to show a backdrop of the Earth King's throne room. The Earth King and Bosco's costume appears to be sewn together. The Earth King looks like a little boy sitting on Bosco's lap who is sitting on the throne. Cut to another actor Earth Kingdom soldier who gets into a fighting stance. Actress Ty Lee who is much bigger sized than the actual Ty Lee with heavy make up comes into screen and kisses the tips of her fingers. She proceeds to tap her fingers on the actor soldier's shoulder and the soldier freezes up, sticks his tongue out and falls down. Actress Mai joins actress Ty Lee in the centre of the stage in a finishing pose. Cut to the audience who applaud.

Cut back to actresses Mai and Ty Lee as the camera pans up to show actress Aang appearing from behind the throne and somersaulting to the centre of the stage.)

Actress Aang: Avatar State, yip yip.

(The lights on stage dim and her arrow glows in the dark. She closes her eyes and her eye shadow glow to show that the real Aang's tattoos and eyes glow in the Avatar State. A black clad stagehand secures a rope behind her and she gets lifted into the air. The sleeves of actress Mai's costume and the skirt of actress Ty Lee's glow in the dark as well. Camera pans out to show a full view of the stage. Actress Azula jumps out from the smoke on the floor into the air.)

Actress Azula: (Cut to a close up of actress Azula who whips out a blue streak of cloth. Various parts of her armor are glowing in the dark.) Not if my lightning can't help it!

(Cut to actress Aang who opens her eyes slightly to catch the blue cloth. The cloth wobbles and shakes as actress Aang pretends to go into spasms. Cut to a full view of the stage to show actress Azula shaking the clothing as she gets lowered to the stage. Actress Aang lets go of the cloth and the rope lowers her to the floor. Cut to the audience who look on, bewildered. Cut to a close up of actress Aang as her hunched body reaches the floor. Actresses Mai, Ty and Azula jump in front of actress Aang's body in a final pose.)

Actress Azula: The Avatar is no more!

(Cut to the Gaang's viewing box as the audience cheers off screen. Sokka appears offended, Toph leans against the railing, Katara crosses her arms and shakes her head and Zuko brings his hand to his face, not wanting to be reminded of that day.

Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(Scene returns to an overhead shot inside the theatre. Various people are standing around making small talk.)

Suki: It seems like every time (Camera slowly zooms in on the Gaang on the second floor. Zuko is the only one seated on the floor.) there's a big battle you guys barely make it out alive. I mean, you guys lose a lot.
Sokka: (Cut to a close up of the couple as Suki smirks) You're one to talk, Suki. Didn't Azula take you captive? That's right, she did. (She frowns and acts serious)
Suki: Are you trying to get on my bad side?
Sokka: (matter-of-factly) I'm just saying.
Katara: (Cut to the end of the corridor looking at the group as Katara walks in) Does anyone know where Aang is?
Sokka: He left to get me fire gummies like, 10 minutes ago. (He leans against the wall and folds his arms impatiently) And I'm still waiting.
Katara: I'm going to check outside.

(She walks off screen. Cut to outside the theatre looking at the sea. Camera pans to the left to show Aang standing alone at the balcony. His back is illuminated as someone opens the door. The lights diminish as the door closes. Katara walks into screen and stops behind him.)

Katara: (Cut to a frontal shot of Aang with Katara behind him) Are you alright?
Aang: No, I'm not. (He throws his hat on the ground. Cut to the ground as the hat lands.) I hate this play.
Katara: (Cut to a back view shot of Katara as she walks forward) I know it's upsetting but it sounds like you're overreacting.
Aang: (He turns towards Katara and goes into an outburst) Overreacting? If I hadn't blocked my chakra, I'd probably be in the Avatar State (raises his arm to the sky) right now.

(He leans back onto the railing. Cut to a little boy cosplaying as Aang running out of a door.)

Little Boy: Wheeee.

(Camera slowly pans out as he runs past the camera. Suki and Sokka look at the boy.)

Sokka: Suki, what are the chances you can get me backstage I got some jokes I want to give to the actor >me.
Suki: (Cut to a close up of Suki's face as she employs a serious and no-nonsense attitude) I'm an elite warrior who's trained (her eyes dart to the side) for many years in the art of stealth. (She smiles widely) I think I can get you backstage.

(Both of them walk off screen.)

Toph: Jeez. Everyone's getting so upset about their characters. Even you seem more down than usual and that's saying something.
Zuko: You don't get it. (He looks up at Toph who leans against the wall smiling to herself) It's different for you. You get a muscley version of yourself taking down 10 bad guys at once and making sassy remarks.
Toph: Yeah, that's pretty great.
Zuko: (Cut to a close up of Zuko whose face is full of regret) But for me, it takes all the mistakes I've made in my life and shove them back in my face. (Cut to behind a pillar in front of them as the camera slowly pans to the right to show the 2 of them) My Uncle. He's always been on my side even when things were bad. He was there for me. He taught me so much and how do I repay him? (Cut to the side view of Zuko's unscarred side) With a knife in his back. It's my greatest regret (lowers his head, ashamed) and I may never get to redeem myself.
Toph: (Camera pans to the right slightly as Toph sits down) You have redeemed yourself to your Uncle. (Cut to a frontal shot of the two) You don't realize it but you already have.
Zuko: How do you know?
Toph: Because I once had a long conversation with the guy and all he would talk about was you. (Zuko lowers his hood and smiles)
Zuko: Really?
Toph: Yeah, and it was kind of annoying.
Zuko: Oh, sorry.
Toph: But it was also very sweet. (Cut to an area above Toph's head as the camera slowly zooms in on a smiling and happy Zuko) All your Uncle wanted was for you to find your own path and see the light. Now you're here with us. ( Cut back to a frontal shot of them again) He'd be proud. (Toph proceeds to give him a punch on the shoulder)
Zuko: Ow. (rubs his arm) What was that for?
Toph: (Cut to Toph who smiles) That's how I show affection.

(Cut to a side view of Zuko as the little boy exits from the same door again. He pauses in front of Zuko.)

Little Boy: Your Zuko costume is pretty good but your scar's (He points to the right side of his face as Zuko's jaw drops in shock) on the wrong side.

(He runs off screen as Zuko attempts to still his anger.)

Zuko: The scar (points to his face) is not on the wrong side!

(He brings up his hood again. Cut to an overhead shot of backstage as the actors rest and talk to each other. Camera pans down to the entrance of the backstage as Suki and Sokka appear at the doorway. Cut to a side view shot of the door as Suki and Sokka's heads peek out.)

Suki: (Sounds of footsteps come towards the doorway) He's coming this way.

(Cut to actor Sokka who is walking with his hand on his chin. Sokka swiftly pops into screen in front of him.)

Actor Sokka: Can I help you?
Sokka: (Cut to actor Sokka's point of view as Sokka smiles sweetly) Actually, I think I can help you. (points to actor Sokka) I'm a big Sokka fan but I don't think you're representing him quite as well as you could be. (Cut to a side view shot of the scene.)
Actor Sokka: Oh no... (brings his hand to his head) another fan (turns and walks away) with ideas. (Sokka swiftly steps in front of him, blocking his path)
Sokka: (He places both arms out in front of him) Just hear me out. Here's something (He rummages through his belt and pulls up several cue cards) I think the real Sokka would say. (He shuffles through the cards and picks one card out from the pile and clears his throat) "What does the cabbage merchant use to fix his cabbages?" (He smiles and thrusts his arms out in a 'Ta-Dah' motion) "A cabbage patch."

(Cut to a front shot of actor Sokka as Suki smacks her forehead behind him.)

Actor Sokka: (He laughs and Suki is surprised) That's actually pretty good. (Cut to a frontal shot of Sokka who smiles and offers the cue cards. Actor Sokka's hands come into screen and take the tiny slips of paper.) Let me see those. (Cut to an area behind Sokka looking at the 3 of them) Haha. Rocky relationship. Not bad.
Sokka: (Sokka ducks off screen and appears at actor Sokka's side, holding his shoulder) Also, don't be afraid to make up some phrases. (Both of them begin to walk off screen) Especially before an attack. Something like "Flying Kick-A-Pow!"
Actor Sokka: (Cut to an area behind Suki's legs looking at the 2 departing boys) Who are you, anyway?
Sokka: I'm just a guy who likes comedy.

(Cut to the full Moon with some clouds passing by.)

Aang: (off screen) Katara, (Cut to the back view of the two) did you really mean what you said in there? (He turns, crosses his arms and leans back against the railing)
Katara: (turns her head towards Aang) In where? What are you talking about?
Aang: (Cut to a close up of an irritated Aang) On stage. When you said (clenches his fist) I was just like a brother (throws his arms towards the theatre) to you and you didn't have feelings for me. (he place his hand on his chest)
Katara: (Cut to a close up back view of the two as Katara turns her body towards Aang) I didn't say that. An actor (She gestures her arms towards the theatre) said that. (She places her right hand against her left elbow)
Aang: But it's true, isn't it? (Cut to a close up of a depressed Aang) We kissed at the invasion and I thought we were going to be together but we're not.
Katara: (Cut to an area above Aang's head as an unsure Katara turns back to the ocean) Aang, (shakes her head) I don't know.
Aang: Why don't you know?
Katara: (seriously) Because we're in the middle of a war and (folds her arms and looks towards the theatre) we have other things to worry about. This isn't the right time.
Aang: (Cut to a close up of an impatient Aang) Well, when is the right time?
Katara: (Cut to a close up of Katara who is deep in thought) Aang, I'm sorry but right now, (she tugs at her hair and closes her eyes) I'm just a little confused.

(Cut back to Aang who looks to the side. Cut to a side view of Katara as Aang's head appears on screen and he pecks her lips. Katara opens her eyes and takes a step back, shocked.)

Katara: (annoyed) I just said that I was confused. (Cut to a confused Aang. Cut back to a visibly displeased Katara) I'm going inside.

(She walks off screen. Cut to an area outside the railing behind Aang as Katara runs off.)

Aang: (He turns his head towards the camera and raps his head several times) Argh! (He brings his head down to the railing) I'm such an idiot!

(Cut to an overhead view of the Gaang's viewing box as Aang enters the screen with his hat back on and sits in the same row as Sokka and Suki. He brings his knees up to his chest.)

Sokka: (Camera pans out to a whispering Sokka) Here's what you missed. (He counts the scenes with his fingers) We went to the Fire Nation and you got better and Katara was the Painted Lady (Cut to the back of Katara's head as the camera slowly zooms in) and I got a sword and I think Combustion Man died. (Cut back to Sokka and Aang) Ooo look, The Invasion's (Aang lowers his head down to his knees) about to start. Shh.

(Cut to the back view of the audience in front of the stage looking at the scene where the submarines surface during The Invasion. Actresses Katara and Aang are standing on top of the submarine prop.)

Actress Katara: I just want to let you know Aang, that I'll always love
you. (She places her hands across her heart. Cut to a close up of the 2 actresses as she takes a deep breath.) Like a brother.
Actress Aang: I wouldn't want it (She swings her arm across her body happily) any other way.

(They shake each other's hands and nod in a friendly gesture. Actress Aang unfolds her mini glider and the rope pulls her up. Actress Katara waves goodbye. Cut to a frontal shot of Katara and Zuko with Aang behind them. Aang blushes at the scene and pulls his hat down while Katara looks away sadly.

Cut to actress Katara and actors Sokka and Toph standing on the submarine looking around.)

Actor Sokka: Hey Toph, would you say you and Aang have a rocky relationship?

(Cut to Suki and Sokka as the audience laughs off screen. Sokka goes ballistic and laughs to himself, grabbing his head and then grabbing Suki by her shoulders. Camera pans to the right to show Aang who buries his head completely in his arms.)

Sokka: (Sokka lifts Aang's hat up) I told him to say that.

(He puts back the hat and Aang appears annoyed. Cut to the 3 actors on the submarine who appear bored except for actor Sokka.)

Actor Sokka: I hope everyone's ready for The Invasion. (thrusts his arms out in a stance) Slop-A-Pow!

(Actress Katara and actor Toph are surprised by the line and the audience laughs off screen. Cut back to Sokka and Suki as Sokka once again laughs to himself and thumps his lap in approval. Suki looks at her boyfriend weirdly but smiles since he is enjoying himself.

Cut to the back view of the audience in front of the stage as the curtain is drawn up. 2 black clad stagehands push the Fire Lord's throne to the centre of the stage and run offstage as actress Katara and actor Toph and Sokka run on stage. Actress Aang gets lowered in front of the throne set decoration by a rope and the spotlight shines on her.)

Actress Aang: We finally made it to the royal palace but no one's home.

(Actor Zuko walks onto stage.)

Actor Zuko: Actually, (another spotlight shines on him) I'm home and (Cut to a close up of actor Zuko still in his Season 1 outfit but his hair is spiky.) I want to join you.
Actor Sokka: (Cut to the "Gaang" with actor Sokka poised in an attacking position) I guess (he lowers his boomerang prop) we have no choice. Come on.

(He gestures actor Zuko to fall him. Cut to a full view of the stage as everyone runs offstage while actress Aang gets pulled up. Cut to a far shot of the Gaang's viewing box.)

Sokka: I guess that's it. (He stands up and stretches) The play's caught up to the present now.
Suki: Wait. (Cut to a close up of Suki as she tugs on Sokka's shirt and pulls him back down to his seat) The play's not over.
Sokka: But it is over. (He puts his hand on his chin in deep thought) Unless... (Camera zooms in on his face, his face lights up mysteriously and spooky music being to play) This is the future.

(Cut to the pitch black stage as an evil looking actor Ozai walks out from the shadows with the light illuminating his face. His crown is too big and his beard appears to be glued on, giving it a stiff appearance.)

Actor Ozai: With the energy harnessed (Cut to a full view of the stage with an orange lantern slowly being pulled across the stage above the throne) from that comet, no one will be able to stop the Fire Nation!
Actress Azula: (Actress Azula comes into screen and kneels before the throne prop) Father, Zuko and the Avatar are at the palace. They're (She points both arms offstage) trying to stop you. (She points towards actor Ozai)
Actor Ozai: (Cut to a close up of Actor Ozai as he points towards actress Azula) You take care of Zuko. (He places a hand on his chest melodramatically) I shall face the Avatar myself.

(Cut to a full view of the stage as actor Ozai raises his hands and he vanishes with a puff of smoke. Actress Azula stands up and moves to the centre of the stage as actor Zuko enters from the left side of the stage while actress Aang is lowered to the stage on the right.)

Actor Zuko: Aang, you fight the Fire Lord, I'll hold her off. (Actress Aang gets pulled up by the rope)
Actress Azula: (Cut to a close up of actress Azula) You are no longer my brother. (clenches her hands) You are an enemy.
Actor Zuko: (Cut to a close up of actor Zuko) No, (points towards actress Azula) I am the rightful heir to the throne!
Actress Azula: (Cut back to actress Azula who smirks slyly) We'll see.

(She whips out her blue streamer and sends it towards actor Zuko. Cut to a full view of the stage as actor Zuko takes out his own red streamer and dodges the blue one. He jumps over actress Azula's head, taking her spot while actress Azula runs towards actor Zuko's original spot. They throw their streamers towards each other. Cut to a close up of actor Zuko as he throws out his 2 red streamers. Cut to a close up side view of actress Azula as she ducks and cut to a full view of the stage as she jumps over actor Zuko, returning back to their original positions.

Cut to a close up frontal shot of actress Azula as she whips her streamers in arcs around her body and she stretches her palm out. Fake fire props made of paper pop up from the stage floor in front of her in increasing size towards actor Zuko. A huge fire prop comes up at actor Zuko's side, hiding him from the audience but his silhouette can still seen. Actor Zuko raises his arms in pain.)

Actor Zuko: (Cut to a close up of his silhouette as he drops to the floor) Honor!

(Cut to an area behind actress Azula's back to show actor Zuko being lowered through a trap door. She turns towards the audience and does a Fire Nation bow. Cut to the audience who cheer and applaud. Cut to a stunned Zuko. Camera zooms out to show the Gaang who are all shocked as they turn towards Zuko quizzically.

Cut to a full view of the stage as the fake fire props come out from the sides to the centre. Cut to a close up of the fire props as actress Aang walks on stage, looking around carefully. Actor Ozai is sitting in the dark behind her.)

Actor Ozai: (The spotlight shines on actor Ozai) So, (Actress Aang turns towards him) you have mastered all 4 elements
Actress Aang: (points her staff towards actor Ozai) Yeah and now, (points her free hand down) you're going down.
Actor Ozai: (Cut to a close up of a lethal looking actor Ozai) No, it is you who are going down. (Cut to an area behind actress Aang's legs looking at actor Ozai as he stands up) You see, you are too late. (Actress Aang acts shocked) The comet is already here and (Cut to a frightened Aang as he widens his eyes) I'm unstoppable.

(Cut to a frontal shot of actor Ozai as he whips his red streamers out. Cut to a view of the stage as he throws it towards actress Aang and she jumps away. The streamers hit the floor in a puff of smoke. Cut to a close up of actress Aang as a white-blue flag pop up from both ends of her staff and she twirls the staff in arcs around her body. Cut to actor Ozai who is twirling the streamers around his body in arcs as well. He throws the streamers out but actress Aang flies over him, twirling her staff along the way.

Cut to a close up of actress Aang's back as she lands and she turns towards actor Ozai. Cut to full view of the scene as both actors twirl their prop weapons and walk towards each other. Actor Ozai throws his streamer out while actress Aang ducks and attempts to swipe her staff as actor Ozai's legs. She jumps away from him and lands in a stance. Cut to actor Ozai who begins to shoot streamers from his sleeves. Cut to a side view of actress Aang and the rope pulls her up over actor Ozai as he continues to shoot more streamers but misses.

Cut to a frontal shot of actress Aang as she lands on the other side of the stage. Cut to a close up of actor Ozai as he thrusts his palms out. Cut to a full view of the stage to show a large blast of fake fire carried across the stage rapidly from behind actor Ozai, wrapping around actress Aang like a sushi roll as she drops her staff prop. A black clad stagehand can be seen running offstage from behind the fake fire.)

Actress Aang: (Cut to a close up of actress Aang who twirls and circles within the cloth) Nooo...

(She falls off screen as the rope detaches from her back. Cut to an overhead shot of actress Aang as she falls to the ground gracefully and the cloth spreads out around her. Cut to a close up of a smiling actor Ozai. Camera pans to the left to show actress Azula walking onto stage.)

Actress Azula: It is over, Father. (raises her arms victoriously) We've done it.
Actor Ozai: (punches his hand into the air melodramatically) Yes, we have done it! (Cut to a full view of the stage as it gets surrounded by large cloths of fake fire) The dreams of my Father, (the platform he is standing on rises as a cloth of fake fire is raised behind him) and my Father's Father have now been realized. (He throws his arms up and the Fire Nation banner unfurls behind him) The World (Cut to a close up of actor Ozai) is mine.

(Cut to the audience who proceed to give him a standing ovation. Cut to the Gaang who look on speechlessly. Cut to an area behind actor Ozai as he remains in his victory pose and the camera slowly pans up to show the entire audience. Fade to an area in the sea looking at the theatre as the Gaang walks along the shore.)

Zuko: That... wasn't a good play. (Cut to frontal shot of the group as they walk off screen in single file with Zuko in the lead. All of them have unhappy looks on their faces)
Aang: I'll say.
Katara: No kidding.
Suki: Horrible.
Toph: You said it.
Sokka: But the effects (waves his arms out matter-of-factly) were decent.

(He and Suki walk off screen. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
["Previously on Avatar" sequence, including clips from "The Ember Island Players", "The Avatar State", "The Awakening", "The Avatar and The Firelord", "The Day of Black Sun, Parts 1 & 2", "The Boiling Rock Parts 1 & 2" and "The Southern Raiders".]



Act I

(The episode opens up to an overhead view Fire Lord Ozai's old beach house on Ember Island. Cut to Aang's boot shifting to the side into a stance. Camera zooms out to reveal a full body shot of Aang practicing in front of the beach house with the rest of the Gaang resting on steps in the background. Aang proceeds to firebend arcs with his arms, right leg followed by his left leg. He walks towards the camera as he does so. Then he firebends a flurry of small shot, circles rapidly with his arms. Cut to Zuko who is looking sternly at Aang's training with his arms crossed.)

Zuko: More ferocious!

(Aang's fist firebends into the camera's view and his head comes into view as he walks forward. He has an intense look of concentration on his face.)

Zuko: Imagine striking through your opponent's heart.

(Aang firebends another big shot of fire towards the camera and turns towards Zuko with his arms in a frustrated gesture.)

Aang: Ugh! I'm trying.
Zuko: Now let me hear you roar like a tiger-dillo!

(Aang turns back to the camera instantly, stretches his arms and roars rather softly with weak streams of fire coming out from his palm and mouth. Aang grins sheepishly at his weak attempt.)

Zuko: That sounded pathetic! (Cut back to Zuko lashing out) I said roar!

(Cut to Aang's back view. Camera quickly cuts to Aang's front view. He turns around, roars ferociously and firebends rather strongly out of both hands and his mouth. The camera changes to an overhead shot to show the intensity of the flames. Momo can be seen scurrying towards Zuko. Cut to Zuko's legs as Momo seeks refuge behind them.

Camera moves up to show Zuko nodding his head in approval. Cut to Katara holding two watermelons with straws in them.)

Katara: Who wants a nice, cool glass of watermelon juice?

(Cut back to Aang who comically has an exclamation mark over his head. His eyes widen with greed.)

Aang: Ooo, ooo, (turns around) me, me, me! (he begins to run towards the house)
Zuko: Hey, (Zuko's hand comes into screen and holds Aang back by his robes) your lesson's not over yet! (Aang tries to break free of his grip and his tongue comically sticks out to show that he is thirsty.) Get back here.

(Aang gets pulled up and the camera zooms out to show Zuko pulling him up effortlessly with Aang looking rather disappointed.)

Suki: (off screen) Come on, Zuko. (Cut to Suki and Sokka lounging on the steps. Sokka drinks his watermelon juice and looks on.) Just take a break. What's the big deal?
Zuko: Fine.

(He releases Aang and Aang dashes off, leaving a trail of dust behind.)

Zuko: If you want to lounge around (Cut to the top of the steps to show Aang running towards Katara and accepting the watermelon with glee and proceeds to slurp the juice noisily and greedily) like a bunch of snail-sloths all day, then go ahead! (Zuko turns and walks away)
Sokka: (off screen) Maybe Zuko's right. (Cut back to Sokka.) Sitting around the house has made us pretty lazy. But I know (lays his watermelon aside and stands up slowly) just the thing to change that. Beach party!

(He removes his outer coat, revealing a pair of brown undershorts underneath and dives excitedly out of the camera's view. Camera changes scene to the ocean to show that he entered the water with a splash. Sokka surfaces with seaweed on his head and he blows water from his mouth. He grins goofily.

Cut to Katara jumping off the shore into the water as she waterbends a surfboard made of ice. She proceeds to surf as the water displaced by her movements splashes against the camera. Cut to the underside of the ice surfboard as Katara jumps off a wave of water and her image is silhouetted against the Sun. She lands back into the water with ease and continues surfing. Cut to Suki laying on a beach mat in her red beach outfit. She smiles as Sokka walks into screen carrying seaweed in his arms. She looks puzzled as Sokka grabs empty pails and exits the screen before re-entering a spilt second later with the buckets full of water and a huge smile plastered on his face.

Cut to Aang who is holding a big piece of wood in his hand. Camera zooms out to show him placing the piece of wood as a horn into his sand sculpture of Appa.)

Aang: (raises both arms) Check out my Appa sand sculpture. (Camera zooms and shows the real Appa growling at the sight. Toph walks into screen.)
Toph: Not bad, baldy. But I've been working on my sandbending (stretches and cracks her fingers) You're gonna love this.

(Cut to the area in front of Toph. She moves her hands and sends clouds of sand dust everywhere. The dust clears to reveal a miniature replica of Ba Sing Se in the sand. Cut to the top view to show the huge Earth King's palace in the middle with tiny houses surrounding it. Aang walks towards it and kneels down, scrutinising the details.)

Aang: Whoa. (he looks at the sand replica of Earth King Kuei and his bear, Bosco) Wow, you even made a little Earth King and Bosco.

(Cut to Sokka who is frantically carving at his sculpture, sending specks of sand flying everywhere. Toph & Aang walk into screen behind him.)

Toph: Try and top that, Sokka.
Sokka: Ta-da!

(He reveals his sand sculpture with seaweed for hair, stones for eyes, a red starfish for a nose, and some stones and seashells as a smile.)

Aang: Is that a blubbering, blob monster?
Sokka: No, (stomps the ground defensively) it's Suki. (Cut to Aang with an animated look of shock and surprise on his face as both he and Toph burst into a fit of laughter.)
Toph: Suki, we'll all understand if you break up with him over this.
Suki: I think it's sweet. (Sokka runs and slides into screen on his knees as he grabs Suki by her shoulders and kisses her on the cheek.)
Aang: But it doesn't even look like...

(A burst of fire hits the sand sculpture, sending waves of send everywhere. Aang yells in surprise and shields himself from the impact. The dust clears and Aang looks up at the cliff. Cut to Zuko running and jumping off the cliff, firebending at Aang at the same time. Aang narrowly misses the flames and jumps across Toph's sand sculpture. Cut to the bottom of the sculpture as Aang flies across it. A ball of fire hits one of the sand houses, breaking it into a wave of sand instantly. Aang lands on the other side near his sand sculpture as he turns around and looks frightened. He then jumps over his sand sculpture.

Cut to the inside of Toph's sand sculpture as Zuko lands in front of it. He runs on the sculpture towards Aang. Aang peeks out from behind Appa's sand head.)

Aang: What are you doing?!
Zuko: (Cut to Zuko's boot stopping in the sand. Cut to Zuko's face.) Teaching you a lesson!

(He firebends towards the Appa sculpture. Aang looks away before the camera zooms out to show him jumping away from the impact. The stream of fire "cuts" the Appa sculpture in half, destroying it into a pile of sand.

Cut to Zuko's sidev iew as Aang lands a distance away from him. Zuko turns and firebends towards Aang but he misses as Aang jumps onto the cliff. Zuko firebends towards the cliff repeatedly as Aang struggles to run across the uneven surface. Zuko's last blast shatters the top part of the cliff into rubble. Cut to an overhead shot of Zuko as he runs towards the cliff and proceeds to scale it.

Cut to Katara who surfs back to shore.)

Katara: What happened?
Sokka: Zuko's gone crazy! I made a sand sculpture of Suki (tries to pick up the fallen sand to mould the sculpture back into shape) and he destroyed it! Oh, and he's attacking Aang.

(Suki grabs Sokka and they run back to help Aang.

Cut back to Aang with Zuko hot on his heel. Zuko firebends at him but Aang jumps out of the way in time. The fire clears and Zuko is still chasing after Aang angrily. Cut to the side of a huge rock as Aang runs to the top of it and jumps off before Zuko sends strong blasts of fire at the rock, disintegrating it into pieces. Aang grabs onto the top of a trunk of a nearby tree as Zuko jumps off the rock and somersaults to the bottom.

Cut to Zuko landing on the sand with a roll and firebending at the top of the tree. Aang jumps away. Camera zooms out to show that the tree has caught fire and Aang lands somewhere on the beach house's roof, out of view. Cut to Zuko who jumps onto the beach house's railings as he scales and flips his way to the roof. Cut to rooftop as Zuko's head appears into screen and he pushes himself with his arm and lands in a stance. Camera zooms out to show Aang waiting for him in a similar stance.)

Aang: Get a grip before I blast you off this roof!
Zuko: Go ahead and do it!

(He then firebends with his fists and feet one after another. Cut to Aang sliding down the roof as jets of fire sets the path he was on alight. Aang reaches the end of the roof and he grabs onto the edge as he swings himself into a nearby room through the window. He slides across the floor on his knees to hide behind a drawer. A huge blast of fire through the roof sends some debris into the room and Zuko lands. He gets into a stance and looks around the room warily. Aang then kicks the drawer towards Zuko. He blocks it by disintegrating the drawer into pieces with a firebending punch.

Cut to the end of the corridor as Aang runs out from the room followed shortly by Zuko. Zuko firebends huge whips and arcs of flame around himself. Cut to Zuko's back view as he sends the tunnel of fire towards Aang. Cut to Aang running away desperately and time slows down as Aang looks back to find himself being slowly engulfed by the fire. Time resumes back to normal as he airbends the fire away, creating a safe space for him to land on without get burnt. Cut to Aang's face as the fire reflects off his eyes.)

Aang: (furiously) Enough!

(He airbends a huge tunnel of air towards Zuko, extinguishing the flames at the same time. Cut to Zuko yelling in surprise as he gets pushed back by the strong air pressure. Cut to the outside of the house as its side gets ripped open by the visible tunnel of wind, throwing out some wooden debris along with Zuko. The sound effects suggests that Zuko is sliding down some tree branches. Cut to the grass as Zuko lands on it and attempts to stand up, grabbing his head and moaning slightly. The others come into screen behind Zuko.)

Katara: What's wrong with you?! (Aang jumps off the balcony and lands near the group.) You could have hurt Aang.
Zuko: What's wrong with me? What's wrong with all of you! (Cut to Zuko's front view as he stands up and throws his arm to the side in anger) How can you sit around having beach parties when Sozin's Comet (Camera slowly pans through the rest of the group who have guilty looks on their faces) is only 3 days away!

(Cut to a top view of the group.)

Zuko: Why are you all looking at me like I'm crazy?
Aang: About Sozin's Comet... (takes a step forward) I was actually going to wait to fight the Fire Lord until after it came.
Zuko: After?
Aang: I'm not ready. (looks unconfident and unsure) I need more time to master firebending.
Toph: And frankly, your earthbending could still use some work too. (Aang looks disappointed)
Zuko: So... You all knew Aang was going to wait?
Sokka: Honestly, if Aang tries to fight the Fire Lord right now, he's gonna lose. No offence.
Katara: The whole point of fighting the Fire Lord before the comet was to stop the Fire Nation from winning the war. But they pretty much won the war when they took Ba Sing Se. Things can't get any worse. (drops her head in worry)
Zuko: You're wrong. (turns head towards camera) It's about to get worse than you can even imagine.

(Scene fades to the corridor leading to the Fire Lord's war room.)

Zuko: (voiceover) The day before the eclipse, my Father asked me to attend an important war meeting. (Zuko's servants help him wear and tighten his armor shoulder pads as he walks towards the room) It was what I dreamed about (the servants bow in respect) and wanted (Cut to Zuko standing in front of the war room's curtain entrance) for so many years. My Father (Camera slowly zooms in on Zuko's back and he raises both hands) had finally accepted me back. (Cut to the opposite side of the curtain as Zuko thrusts the curtain apart, revealing his presence. He walks forward. Cut to the top of Fire Lord Ozai's throne to show the whole room. There is a map of the Earth Kingdom spread out on a table with generals seated around the length of the table.)

Fire Lord Ozai: Welcome, Prince Zuko. We waited for you.

(Cut to the generals glancing at Zuko. Cut to full view of the throne. Azula is already seated on Ozai's left. Ozai gestures to his son to take his seat and Zuko bows before sitting down. Cut to a close up sideview of Ozai watching his son.)

Fire Lord Ozai: General Shinu, your report.
General Shinu: (Cut to Shinu who bows his head in acknowledgement) Thank you, sir. (He stands up) Ba Sing Se is still under our control. (Cut to an area behind Ozai and shows Shinu slowly pacing his way to the end of the table) However, earthbender rebellions have prevented us from achieving total victory in the Earth Kingdom.
Fire Lord Ozai: (Cut to Ozai who frowns at the news) What is your recommendation?
General Shinu: Our army is spread too thin but once the eclipse is over and the invasion defeated, we should transfer more domestic forces into the Earth Kingdom.

(Cut back to a close up sideview shot of Ozai. Zuko is slouching and appears uninterested.)

Fire Lord Ozai: Hmm... (turns his head to his son) Prince Zuko, (Zuko looks at his father) you've been among the Earth Kingdom commoners. Do you think that adding more troops will stop these rebellions?
Zuko: (Cut to the front view of Zuko as he drops his head and thinks) The people of the Earth Kingdom are proud and strong. They can endure anything as long as they have hope.
Fire Lord Ozai: Yes, you're right. (Cut to a close up shot of his face as he gives an evil, lethal look) We need to destroy their hope.
Zuko: (Cut to a side view of Father and son) Well, that's not exactly what I...
Azula: (interrupts) I think you should take their precious hope (fingers her fringe and tosses it aside without a care) and the rest of their land, (looks at the table fiercely) and burn it all to the ground.

(The princess crosses her arms and smiles at her own brilliant suggestion.)

Fire Lord Ozai: Yes... (Smiles evilly) Yes, you're right, Azula.(Cut to Azula who smiles at her Father's acknowledgement of her plan. Ozai gets up and walks towards the table.) Sozin's Comet is almost upon us (Cut to a full view of the table and throne and Ozai stops near the edge of the table) and on that day it will endow us with the strength and power of a hundred Suns. No bender will stand a chance against us.
General Shinu: (Cut to an area behind Ozai's back as his generals and Shinu look on) What are you suggesting, sir?
Fire Lord Ozai: When the comet last came, my grandfather, Fire Lord Sozin, used it to wipe out the Air Nomads. Now, I will use its power to end the Earth Kingdom. (Cut to Zuko and the camera slowly zooms in on him. He is shocked as his Father's cruel revelation.) Permanently. (Cut to the front view of Ozai as he grins from ear to ear and walks across the table) From our airships, (Cut to the Earth Kingdom area of the map and the camera slowly zooms out as Ozai's shadow covers the East side of the continent) we will rain fire over their lands. A fire that will destroy everything. (Ozai walks across from one side of the map to middle of it) And out of the ashes, (he opens his arms to the side) a new World will be born. A World in which all the lands are Fire Nation and I am (Cut back to the front view of Ozai as he raises his arms high) the supreme ruler of everything! (the generals burst into applause.)
Zuko: (Cut to the sideview of Zuko's scarred eye as he looks down) I wanted to speak out against this horrifying plan. (Cut to an area behind Zuko's head as it slowly zooms in on the back of his head. The generals are still applauding and Ozai basks in the excitement.) But I'm ashamed to say I didn't. (Cut back to present day Zuko) My whole life I struggled to gain my Father's love and acceptance. (Cut to show the whole Gaang looking at Zuko who is sitting on a rock) But once I had it, I realized I lost myself getting there. (Katara raises her hand to her forehead in despair) I forgotten who I was.

(Katara drops down to the ground on her knees. Sokka grabs Suki by the shoulder in an assuring gesture.)

Katara: I can't believe this. (shakes her head)
Sokka: I always knew that the Fire Lord was a bad guy but his plan is just pure evil. (Suki shakes her head)
Aang: What am I going to do?
Zuko: I know you're scared. (he stands up and walks towards Aang) And I know that you're not ready to save the World. But if you don't defeat the
Fire Lord before the comet comes, (Cut to Zuko who is looking very serious) there won't be a World to save anymore.

(Camera slowly zooms in on Aang who looks stunned and blur. Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(Scene returns with Aang facing the group.)

Aang: Why (points to self) didn't you tell me (turns around and walks off screen) about your Dad's crazy plan sooner?
Zuko: (takes a step forward) I didn't think I had to. I assumed that you were still going to fight him before the comet. No one told me you decided to wait!
Aang: This is bad. (places both hands on head in despair) This is really, (shakes his head and drops to his knees) really bad. (Cut to a close up of Aang whose face is full of worry and despair)
Katara: (off screen) Aang, you (Cut to a side shot where Katara is standing behind Aang. He looks up at her) don't have to do this alone. (Toph and Zuko walk into screen)
Toph: Yeah. (Suki and Sokka join in) If we all fight the Fire Lord together, we got a shot at taking him down.
Sokka: Alright! (raises arm in enthusiasm) Team Avatar is back! (points confidently) Air. (Cut to Aang) Water. (Cut to Katara) Earth. (Cut to Toph) Fire. (Cut to Zuko) Fan (picks up a palm leaf in a shape of a fan from the ground into Suki's hands) and sword! (He thrusts a blade of leaf into the air. The background music makes a comical sound and the tip of the leaf falls)
Aang: Fighting the Fire Lord is going to be the hardest thing we've ever done together. But I wouldn't want to do it any other way. (The group laughs and they engage in a group hug but Zuko remains standing where he is)
Toph: Yeah.
Sokka: Alright.
Katara: Get over here, Zuko. Being part of the group also means being part of group hugs.

(Zuko looks to the side with a "Do I have to this " look on his face and fits into the opening Suki & Toph created. Appa growls off screen, the Gaang looks up and they get tackled to the ground by the giant sky bison. Momo chatters away on Appa's head.

Cut to an overhead view of the courtyard in the beach house.)

Zuko: There's one technique you need (Cut to a close up shot of Zuko standing in front of Aang. Katara and Momo sit at the side, spectating) to know before facing my Father. How to redirect lightning. (Aang grins with anticipation) If you let the energy in your own body flow, (He stretches his left arm out and the fingers on his right hand touch the fingers on his left hand and swiftly traces a path down his arm, shoulder, stomach and back out the other side) the lightning will follow it. (His left hand touches his right, they are parallel to each other) You turn your opponent's energy against them.

(He repeats the motion to the left side of his body.)

Aang: That's like waterbending.
Zuko: Exactly. My Uncle (Aang begins to mimic Zuko's movements) invented this technique himself by studying waterbenders.
Aang: So... Have you ever redirected lightning before?
Zuko: Once. Against my Father.
Aang: What did it feel like? (Zuko stops whatever he is doing and does a cool down motion with his hands)
Zuko: Exhilarating. (Cut to a flashback of Ozai throwing lightning at Zuko and he re-directing it back during their confrontation in "The Eclipse") But terrifying. (Cut back to Aang who has raised both arms eagerly to his chest but his face falls when Zuko says those two words) You feel so powerful (Aang's hands drops back to the side. He slouches with disappointment) holding that much energy in your body. But you know that you make the wrong move, it's over.
Aang: Heh. (laughs nervously) Well, not over over, right I mean there's always Katara and a little spirit water (moves his hand in a watery movement) action... Am I right? (turns to Katara)
Katara: (matter-of-factly) Actually I used it all up after Azula shot you.
Aang: Oh.
Zuko: (stares at Aang seriously) You'll have to take the Fire Lord's life. Before he takes yours.
Aang: Yeah... I'll just do that.

(Cut to an overhead view of the courtyard as Zuko walks away. Fade to an area full of rocks at dusk.)

Sokka: (off screen) Gather round Team Avatar. (Cut to a watermelon with some face carvings resembling a jack-o-lantern being dropped onto a wooden structure with a red cloth draped over it. Camera zooms out to reveal Sokka standing in front of the Melon Lord and the rest of the group walking towards him and proceeding to sit in a circle) In order to take out the Fire Lord, or in this case, the "Melon Lord", our timing has to be perfect. (He kneels down) First, Suki and I will draw his fire. (He takes a stick and draws a line curving to the left towards the melon symbol on the ground) Then, Katara and Zuko (He draws a straight line in the middle) charge in with some liquidy hot offence and while the "Melon Lord" is distracted, Aang swoops in and "BAM!" (He draws a line curving to the right which runs through the melon symbol) He delivers the final blow. (Cut to who Aang stares at the drawing with slight disgust)
Toph: Err... (Camera shifts to the right) what about me?
Sokka: (off screen) For now, you're the Melon Lord's forces.
Toph: So I get to chuck flaming rocks at all of you?
Sokka: Whatever makes the training feel more realistic.
Toph: Sweetness. (smiles)

(Camera fades to reveal the Melon Lord with 2 sticks at arms opened up in a V-shape. Toph appears into screen in front of the scarecrow with the same pose.)

Toph: Muahahahahahaha!

(Cut to an overhead view of Toph's area. She is surrounded by a ring of huge boulders covered with seaweed-like things. A ring of fire in bowls sits outside the boulders.

Cut to Zuko and Katara who are hiding behind some rocks, looking at Toph. Zuko turns his head. Cut to Aang who appears out from behind another hiding spot with Momo in tow. He looks to the side. Cut to Suki and Sokka who peer out of their own hiding places. Sokka is wearing his Water Tribe wolf armor. Cut to the area where Toph is and the camera zooms out rapidly to reveal Sokka who signals with his arm to go.

Cut to an overhead view of where the rest are hiding. Sokka, Suki, Zuko and Katara all make their way towards Toph except for Aang who stays put.

Cut to Sokka and Suki who run before the ground shakes and pops up an army of Fire Nation soldiers made of rock charging at them. Cut to a side view of Sokka who cuts the rock in half. Suki jumps into camera as she spins and delivers a kick to another rock soldier, knocking it down. They continue to run before a flaming boulder drops into screen. Cut to a pair of hands touching the rock and the camera zooms out to reveal Suki cart wheeling over it. Cut to Sokka who is lying on the ground with his face mere inches away from being crushed.)

Sokka: (shakes his fist) Watch it, Toph!
Toph: (Cut back to Toph who is clearly enjoying herself) I am not Toph, I am "Melon Lord"! Muahahahahaha!

(She earthbends a rock over the bowl of fire and it gets ignited immediately and she sends it towards Zuko and Katara who dodge it. Cut to an overhead view of Zuko and Katara running as a ring of rock soldiers surround them. Camera rotates around the duo as they fight back to back with fire and waterbending to destroy the rocks.)

Sokka: (Cut back to Sokka who is running with his sword. Flaming rocks are being sent over his head continuously) Now, Aang!

(Cut to Aang's boot sole as he propels himself from the rock with his arms holding his staff in a ready to strike position. Cut to Aang's serious face as he descends. Cut to the Melon Lord scarecrow from his point of view. Cut back to Aang as his face softens. Cut back to the scarecrow. Cut to a sideview of the scarecrow as Aang lands and brings his staff over his head but doesn't deliver the final blow. The staff pauses inches away from the watermelon head. He looks at the scarecrow before slouching and pulling his staff back.)

Zuko: (Cut to the group who are hiding behind a rock behind him) What are you waiting for? Take him out! (Camera slowly pans to Aang who looks unwillingly to perform the action)
Aang: (shakes head) I can't.

(Cut to the sideview of the slope leading to the scarecrow. Sokka enters the screen and trudges up the slope. Cut to a closeup of Aang as Sokka walks up in front of him.)

Sokka: What's wrong with you? (points accusingly at Aang) If this was the real deal, (points at Aang again) you'd be shot full of lightning (he makes a beheading gesture against his neck) right now.
Aang: I'm sorry, but it just didn't feel right. I didn't feel like myself.

(Cut to Sokka who unsheathes his sword. Cut back to Aang as a slashing and squishing sound implies that Sokka cuts the watermelon off screen. He closes his eyes and grimaces at the act.)

Sokka: (off screen) There. (Aang opens his eyes in shock) That's how it's done.

(A piece of the watermelon falls off and hits the ground. Momo runs forward and begins to lick the insides.

Camera zooms in on Aang who has a look of disbelief on his face. Scene changes to night time back at the courtyard. Cut to a plate of untouched food on Aang's lap. Camera slowly pans up to reveal Aang looking down sadly while the rest of the group are heartily tucking in to their dinner. Katara walks in with a long scroll in her hands.)

Katara: I have a surprise for everyone!
Toph: (Cut to Toph holding her chopsticks in her bowl of rice) I knew it! You did have a secret thing with Haru!

(She smiles while Katara gives an expressionless look in the background. Cut to Sokka, Suki and Zuko who are also equally expressionless.

Camera zooms out to show the 3 of them staring at Katara while Toph is picking at her food.)

Katara: Er, no. (All 4 of them suddenly start to shove rice into their mouths) I was looking for cooking pots in the attic and I found this. (Throws scroll downwards as it unrolls by itself.) Look at baby Zuko! (Camera zooms onto the scroll and reveals a baby smiling happily with his arms in the air, enjoying himself at the beach.) Isn't he cute?

(Katara coos as everyone gushes and laughs. Cut back to Zuko with his eyes closed.)

Katara: (off screen) Oh lighten up, I was just teasing.
Zuko: (opens his eyes) That's not me. It's my Father. (Camera zooms out to show them again as Katara rapidly rolls the scroll)
Suki: (points at the scroll and looks at Zuko) But he looked so sweet and innocent.
Zuko: Well that sweet little kid grew up to be a monster. And the worst Father in the history of Fathers.
Aang: But he is still a human being. (Everyone looks at him as the camera pans to Aang)
Zuko: You're going to defend him?
Aang: No, I agree with you. Fire Lord Ozai (stands up and faces the group) is a horrible person and the World will probably be better off without him. There's gotta be another way.
Zuko: (off screen) Like what?
Aang: (shrugs) I don't know. Maybe (raises both arms as if he was holding a bowl) we can make some big pots of glue and then I can use gluebending to stick his arms and legs together so he can't bend anymore.
Zuko: (sarcastically) Yeah. Then you can show him his baby pictures and all those happy memories (everyone starts to laugh and snicker) will make him good again.
Aang: (naively) Do you really think that would work?
Zuko: (seriously and sternly) No!
Aang: (drops his head and sighs) This goes against (paces up and down, looking at his hands) everything I learned from the monks. I can't just go around wiping out people I don't like...
Sokka: Sure, you can. You're the Avatar. If it's in the name of keeping balance, (Aang balls up his fist as he struggles to contain his temper) I'm pretty sure the Universe will forgive you.
Aang: (Cut to Aang's back as he rapidly turns around and bursts out) This isn't a joke, Sokka! None of you understands the position I'm in!
Katara: Aang, we do understand. It's just...
Aang: (rudely interrupts) Just what, Katara?! What?
Katara: (Cut back to Katara who is visibly annoyed) We're trying to help.
Aang: (Cut back to Aang) Then when you (points at Katara) figure out a way for me (brings his hands back to his chest) to beat the Fire Lord without (makes a "no" gesture with his arm) taking his life, I love to hear it! (Raises his arms in exasperation and walks away.)
Katara: Aang, don't walk away from this. (She begins to walk towards him as a hand touches her shoulder to stop her from doing so.)
Zuko: Let him go. He needs time to sort it out by himself.

(Cut to an overhead view of the trees surrounding the house and the balcony Aang is sitting on. There is a table of fire in front of him. Cut to an area behind Aang's shoulder to reveal 4 candles and some offerings consisting of bread, water and fruit on a tray. Cut to an area behind the candles as the camera slowly pans up to reveal Aang in the lotus position. Cut to Aang's head and the camera slowly zooms up. Cut to Aang's sideview as Momo glides in and tries to get Aang's attention by touching his lap.)

Aang: Hey, Momo. (pats Momo's head) I don't suppose you know what I should do. (Cut to Momo who makes a sound) I didn't think so.

(Momo lies on its side while Aang returns back to meditating. Camera fades to some moments later to reveal that Aang is fast asleep, lying on his side near Momo. The candles are already extinguished. Cut to the ocean in front of the house and camera zooms out in a rapid motion. Cut again to an area with trees on the ocean, still facing the house. Aang suddenly opens his eyes and sits up.

Chanting starts to play continuously in the background. Camera slowly pans up from the balcony to reveal a forested area at the edge of the shore. Aang stands up, walks over the tray and climbs over the balcony railing. Momo is awakened and looks at his master. He jumps to the railing before flying off. Cut to a sideview of Aang who walks briskly on the path to the ocean as Momo circles around him in the air. Cut to a close up of Aang who appears to be sleepwalking. Cut to a path of footprints on the beach. The camera pans up to reveal Aang and Momo reaching the edge of the shore. Cut to Aang walking into the water and starts to swim. Cut to Momo who is still on the beach, watching his master swim out to sea, towards the forested area. Momo begins to fly after him. The chanting ends.

Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(Scene opens up to the sea the next morning. Camera pans down to the courtyard where everyone is gathered around Appa.)

Sokka: Okay, that's everything.
Toph: (Cut to Toph's back view. She is sitting on some stone steps) No, it's not. (Everyone turns to face her) Where's Aang? (Cut back to the rest who look surprised and run off to look for him. Cut to Appa who eats his hay nonchalantly.)
Zuko: (Cut back to inside the house. Everyone runs up the steps to the corridor and looks around.) Aang? Aang!
Toph: Come on lazy bones, let's go.

(Suki, Sokka & Katara head to the right of the corridor while Toph & Zuko head in the opposite direction. Cut to the inside of a dark room as the door is suddenly thrown open to reveal Zuko. He walks out of the room and meets Toph who does a "nothing" gesture with her hands. They walk off. Cut to the railing of the balcony. Aang's staff is lying on it. Sokka walks onto the balcony, scratching his head. He sees the staff and looks surprised as the camera zooms out and Suki & Katara walk in.)

Sokka: (his gloved hand grabs the staff) He left his staff. That's so strange.
Zuko: Aang's not in the house. Let's check the beach. (He turns his head towards the beach and the camera zooms in onto the ocean. Cut to a broken docking area on the edge of the sea as 2 seagulls fly pass. The remaining of the Gaang can be seen near the shore as black shadows. )
Sokka: Look! There's his footprints. (Camera pans up to the path of footprints leading to the sea.) The trail ends here.
Suki: So... He went for a midnight swim and never came back?
Katara: Maybe he was captured.
Sokka: I don't think so. There's no sign of a struggle.
Toph: (bends down) I bet he ran away again.
Sokka: Ah-uh. He left behind his glider and Appa.
Toph: Then what do you think happened to him oh sleuthy one?
Sokka: It's pretty obvious. (stands up and throws his hands to the side) Aang mysteriously disappears before an important battle? He's definitely on a Spirit World journey. (His finger points up in an "I got it!" position)
Zuko: But if he was, wouldn't his body still be here?
Sokka: (slumps) Oh yeah, forgot about that.
Katara: Then he's gotta be somewhere on Ember Island. Let's split up and look for him.
Toph: (grabs Zuko's arm swiftly and he blushes) I'm going with Zuko! (Camera pans out to show the rest looking at her curiously) What? Everyone else went on a life changing fieldtrip with Zuko. Now it's my turn. (She hugs him tighter and Zuko is still blushing)

(Cut to the camera being somewhere on the sea. Appa flies out from behind a cliff. Cut to Sokka on Appa's head, looking around with a serious look on his face.

Cut to the bustling town area of Ember Island. There's a crowd surrounding someone in an air nomad outfit and they cheer for "Aang" repeatedly. Camera slowly zooms in on Suki & Katara who are shocked to hear his name. They quickly run to the crowd and breaks a section apart.)

Actress Aang: (The tattooed head turns around) Avatar State, yip yip! (Actor Toph lifts her up in the air as she poses in a flying position as the crowd cheers wildly.

Cut back to Suki & Katara who have an exaggerated anime look of anger and "WHAT?!" on their faces.)

Toph: (Cut to some beach houses and camera pans down to Toph in her Fire Nation outfit & Zuko walking around) And then when I was nine, I ran away again.
Zuko: Uh-huh.
Toph: I know I shouldn't complain, (Closes her eyes and opens her hands to the side. Zuko appears disinterested and looks away.) my parents gave me everything that I ever asked for. But they never gave me the one thing that I really wanted. Their love. You know what I mean? (Zuko drops his head and sighs audibly)
Zuko: (Cut back to Zuko who turns around and looks at her) Look, I know you had a rough childhood but we should really focus on finding Aang. (Cut to the top view of the scene with 2 white birds feeding on a branch. Zuko walks on.)
Toph: (Cut back to Toph who looks disappointed) This is the worst fieldtrip ever.

(She blows her fringe in irritation. Cut back to the roof of Ozai's beach house as the camera pans down to the group sitting on the steps despondently. Toph & Katara are back in their respective nation's outfits. Appa lands onto screen and growls.)

Sokka: Judging by the looks on your faces, I'm guessing you guys didn't find Aang either. (Cut back to the steps as Sokka jumps and lands in front of them)
Zuko: No. It's like he just... disappeared.
Toph: (sits up) Hey, wait a minute, has anyone noticed that Momo's missing too?
Sokka: (turns around in horror) Oh no! (kneels down and camera cuts to the top view of Sokka who is behaving hysterically) I knew it was only a matter of time. Appa ate Momo! (Cut to Appa as Sokka jumps in and lifts Appa's jaws to peer into his mouth) Momo, (Cut to the inside of the mouth with the camera looking at Sokka) I'm coming for ya, buddy (Sokka climbs onto Appa's tongue and tries to crawl his way in.)
Katara: (Cut back to Katara who staring calmly at her brother) Sokka, Appa didn't eat Momo. He's probably with Aang.
Sokka: (Cut to outside Appa's mouth as he turns around and looks at his sister) That's just what Appa wants you to think. (He climbs further in and Appa closes his mouth around Sokka's legs as they flail around.)
Zuko: (off screen) Get out of the bison's mouth, Sokka. (Cut back to Zuko who is not looking very pleased) We have a real problem here. Aang is nowhere to be found and the comet is only 2 days away.
Katara: (Cut to the girls who are looking up at him) What should we do Zuko? (In the background, Sokka slides out of Appa's mouth and his entire body is covered in Appa's saliva.)
Zuko: (stands up) I don't know. (Cut to the rest who continue to stare at him) Why are you all looking at me? (Cut back to Zuko who looks around)
Katara: (Cut back to the rest) Well, you are kind of the expert on tracking Aang.
Toph: (In the background, Sokka is seen standing up and trying to rub off the spit.) Yeah, if anyone's got experience hunting the Avatar,(Sokka takes a step and slips as he hits the ground with a very loud groan) it's you. (Cut back to Zuko's scarred side as he looks down. Cut to the ocean near dusk as Appa flies swiftly towards some dark clouds.

Cut to the front of Zuko who is on Appa's head while the rest watch him
from the saddle.)

Sokka: Zuko, I don't want to tell you how to do your job but why are we heading towards the Earth Kingdom? There's no way Aang's there.
Zuko: (Cut to Zuko's unscarred side as his eye is shown looking back at Sokka) Just trust me.

(Cut to Appa who picks up the pace and soars into the horizon and growls.

Cut to an overhead view of the royal plaza in the Fire Nation. There's a ship docked near the port and some contigents are seen on both sides of the red carpet. Cut to a group of Fire Nation citizens bowing down to a palanquin passing by with a silhouette of a person inside. Cut to a close up to Ozai's face to reveal that he is the one currently in the palanquin. Cut to an overhead shot of the red carpet as Ozai's palanquin proceeds forward.

Camera pans up to reveal another palanquin a fair distance behind. Cut to the inside of that palanquin to reveal Azula sitting crossed legged and looking rather impatient as her eyes darts to the side. Cut to outside the palanquin as Azula throws the veil open.)

Azula: Come on slowpokes, faster!

(The palanquin bearers pick up the pace but they are visibly struggling with the weight. Cut back to Azula who is still not looking very pleased. Cut to an overhead view of the plaza as the palanquin is seen travelling to the port at a very fast speed.

Cut to Ozai's palanquin as a servant holds the veil aside. Cut to Ozai's red and gold boot stepping out. Camera zooms out to reveal a crownless Ozai walking past a line of elite firebenders.

Cut to the front of Ozai as he walks up the steps, leaving the plaza behind him. Azula comes into screen behind him and kneels down.)

Azula: Sorry I'm late, Father. Good palanquin bearers (Her eyes look to the side< menancingly) are so hard to come by these days. So, is everything ready for our departure? (turns her head to the side leisurely)
Fire Lord Ozai: (off screen) There has been a change of plans, Azula.
Azula: (She turns her head back and her eyes widen in shock) What?
Fire Lord Ozai: (Cut to Ozai's back) I've decided to lead the fleet of airships to Ba Sing Se alone. (Cut to Azula who is still looking shocked.) You will remain here in the Fire Nation.
Azula: (whines and begins to behave like a spoilt child) But I thought we were going to do this together.
Fire Lord Ozai: (Cut back to Ozai's back again) My decision is final.
Azula: (Cut back to Azula who looks very unhappy) You... (Stands up and talks back to her Father) you can't treat me like this. (Her face scrunches up into anger and annoyance) You can't treat me like Zuko! (Throws her head forward to make her point)
Fire Lord Ozai: (Cut to Ozai's side view) Azula, silence yourself. (He frowns slightly)
Azula: (Cut back to Azula who whines even more) But it was my idea (clenches her fist towards herself) to burn everything to the ground! I deserve to be by your side!
Fire Lord Ozai: (Turns his head back fiercely and raises his voice sharply) Azula! (Azula stills her temper, closes her eyes and lowers her head in obedience) Listen to me. (Cut to an overhead view of where they are standing on. They are standing on a giant red and gold phoenix motif on the ground surrounded by a handful of fire sages and some elite firebenders. There's a set of armor on a small platform in front of them.) I need you here to watch over the homeland, it's a very important job (Cut back to Azula who opens her eyes) that I can only entrust to you.
Azula: (looks up in disbelief) Really?
Fire Lord Ozai: And for your loyalty, (turns to face his daughter) I've decided to declare you the new Fire Lord.
Azula: (Cut to a close up of her face) Fire Lord Azula? (Her face suddenly looks happy and turns her head to the side) It does seem appropriate. But, (turns her head back) what about you?
Fire Lord Ozai: (Cut to Ozai's face) Fire Lord Ozai is no more. Just as the World will be reborn in fire, (Camera zooms out as the fire sages put on golden phoenix shoulder pad armor on him) I shall be reborn (a phoenix helmet is placed on his head) as the supreme ruler of the World. (Cut to a side view of Ozai) From this moment on, I will be known as... (raises his arms proudly) the "Phoenix King"!

(A large, maroon phoenix motif banner is raised behind him. Cut to the line of firebenders holding the normal, red Fire Lord banners as another group of firebenders in front of them bring up the new, maroon Phoenix King banners. Cut to the other side as they do the same. Cut to 2 firebenders poised beside a giant urn at the bottom of a pillar. Camera zooms in on the urn as they firebend into 2 openings at the side of the urn. Camera pans up the pillar as fire lights up at the top. Cut to the citizens as they bow down. The pillars on each side of the banner light up to resemble a pair of phoenix wings. Cut back to Ozai in his full phoenix armor as the camera slowly zooms out to show the banner and the fire pillars.

Cut to a 3 storey building in the middle of a forested area. A group of people can be seen walking towards the door. Cut to the inside of the noisy building as dancing music from "The Headband" plays. Some patrons are gasping in shock and staring at something. Camera pans to the side as the door opens to reveal Zuko and the rest of the group)

Katara: (observing warily) And the reason you brought us to a seedy Earth Kingdom tavern is what now?
Zuko: June.

(Raises his arm and points. Cut to June sitting dismissively and sipping her tea as a huge burly man lunges as her. She stops him with her leg and pushes him down effortlessly as the man groans. The crowd gasps and are stunned. Junes miles at her success.)

Sokka: (off screen) Oh yeah (Cut to a close up of June's eye) that weird bounty hunter with the giant mole.
Suki: (off screen) Mole? Her skin is flawless.

(Camera zooms out to show June quickly getting off her seat as another opponent dressed like Ryu from Street Fighter crashes into her bench, breaking it into pieces. The previous opponent quickly scrambles away as "Ryu" takes another shot.)

Sokka: (off screen) No, (June deftly dodges and spins away with her tea cup still in hand. "Ryu" continues to fight) she has this giant mole creature she rides around on.
Zuko: (Cut back to the group standing at the doorway) Her shirshu. (groans can be heard from the fight) It's the only animal that can track Aang's scent anywhere in the World. It's the one shot we have of finding him.

(Cut back to the fight as "Ryu" tries to throw punches at June. It narrowly misses her tea cup as she throws it up into the air and time slows down and the tea cup rotates slowly. Cut back to an angry and annoyed June and time resumes back to normal as she throws "Ryu" over her shoulder when he lunges at her. Cut to a table at a corner of the tavern as the patrons widen their eyes and scramble away. "Ryu" lands on the table a second later, knocking off all the dishes on the table. Cut back to June as she grabs her falling tea cup without spilling any of its contents and the music ends. She turns away and drinks her tea.)

Toph: (Cut back to the group at the doorway) I don't know who this June lady is but (crosses her arms and smiles widely) I like her.

(Scene changes to Aang's sleeping form in the forested area and the camera zooms in on his body. Cut to Aang's face as Momo's licks it. He stirs and begins to wake up.)

Aang: (groans from sleepiness) Hey Momo, (sits up and rubs his head. Momo is clutching Aang's head protectively as it looks around) I just had the strangest dream. (He opens his eyes with a surprised look on his face and surveys his surroundings. He turns his head towards the ocean) Wait...

(Camera suddenly zooms in on the ocean and mysterious, eerie, chanting music plays. Cut back to Aang & Momo as the camera rotates slightly around them. Cut to an area in the water looking at the forested area and zooms out. Scene fades to the vast ocean with the forested area appearing to be in the middle of no where)

Aang: (off screen) Where are we?

(The music speeds up a little and ends abruptly. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Episode opens up to the outside of the Earth Kingdom tavern at night. Cut to inside the tavern as the group look at June kicking an empty seat into a comfortable position before sitting down and taking a sip from her cup.)

Sokka: Hey, I remember her. She helped you attack us!
Zuko: Yup, back in the good old days. (Zuko walks off screen. Cut to a wide shot of the table as the group walks towards June.)
June: Oh great, (refilling her cup) it's Prince Pouty. Where's your creepy grandpa?
Zuko: He's my Uncle, and he's not here.
June: (looking at Zuko and Katara and smirking) I see you worked things out with your girlfriend.

(Both Zuko and Katara blush with sweat drop expressions on their faces and protest simultaneously.)

Katara: I'm not his girlfriend!
Zuko: She's not my girlfriend!
June: Okay, okay, (puts a hand out) sheesh. I was only teasing. So what you want?
Zuko: I need your help finding the Avatar.
June: Hmph. Doesn't sound too fun. (She takes another drink from her cup while Zuko gets riled up)
Zuko: (He steps closer to June in a slight outburst) Does the end of the World (June pauses and stares at Zuko) sound like more fun?

(Cut to outside the tavern where Appa and June's shirshu are growling aggressively at each other. Appa then licks the shirshu's face and both of them quiet down. The shirshu turns towards the camera. Cut to June and the group walking towards them.)

June: (lifting up a piece of meat and cajoling) Nyla... (She throws the meat off screen. Cut to Nyla who catches the meat in a gulp. June comes into screen and affectionately strokes her shirshu) Who's my little snuffly wuffly. (Nyla suddenly shoots out her tongue and June steps back) Whoa! (She gently presses down on Nyla's nose to close her mouth) Careful there. Okay, (gesturing to the group) whose got something with the Avatar's scent on it. (Cut to Katara reaching into Appa's saddle)
Katara: I have Aang's staff.

(Cut to June who offers the staff in front of Nyla's snout as she sniffs it. Cut to a side shot of the group as Nyla proceeds to sniff and walk around them while the group follows her movements. Cut to an overhead shot of the group as Nyla continues circling around them and sniffing out Aang's scent. Nyla makes one last round before walking back in front of June and lowering herself on the ground and rubbing her snout with her paws.)

Zuko: (Crossing his arms as Katara and Toph look on puzzled behind him) Well, what does that mean?
June: It means your friend's gone.
Toph: We know he's gone, that's why we're trying to find him.
June: (Cut to the back of June's head as she stands up) No, I mean he's gone gone. (She turns back to the group suddenly) He doesn't exist.

(Cut to the group as they first look puzzled and then worried.

Cut to the forested area in the middle of the water seen in the previous episode. Cut to a squirrel creature trying to crack open a nut on a branch as Momo suddenly jumps in and causes it to drop its nut in fright. Momo then chases the creature around the thick, fat branch. Camera pans to the right to show Aang walking below the branch and looking around.)

Aang: Where are we, Momo? (Cut to Aang's point of view as he looks up at the Sun shining through the canopy. A family of dragonflies fly by. Camera pans down to a fallen log.) Maybe I'm in the Spirit World (Cut to Aang walking under the log still looking up at the canopy) But wait, (Momo crawls onto the log behind him) you can see me. We can both (Cut to a close up of Momo as it stares at Aang curiously) be in the Spirit World. (Aang waves his arms around and airbends a huge gust of air) Nope, (he looks at his hands) my bending works. (Momo jumps on Aang's shoulder and curls its tail around his neck) Maybe if we climb (Camera pans up a slope) to the top of the island we could figure out where we are.

(Cut back to an exasperated Sokka)

Sokka: What do you mean Aang doesn't exist? (Camera zooms out to a full shot of the group and June with her shirshu) Do you mean he's... you know, dead?
June: (Cut to a close up of June patting her shirshu) Nope, we could find him if he were dead. Ah, (gestures her hand out) it's a real head scratcher. (turns back towards her shirshu) See ya. (Cut to a side view of the scene of the group looking at June mount Nyla)
Toph: Helpful, real helpful.
Zuko: Wait, (Zuko walks to the front of the group and faces them) I have another idea. (Cut to a close up of Zuko) There's only one other person in this World who can help us face the Fire Lord. (He lifts his arm out and faces June) I'll be right back with a smell sample.

(Cut to Zuko's finger as he lifts up Iroh's sandal that he dropped for Zuko to find in Season 1. There are some flies buzzing around it. Camera zooms out to show Katara, Suki and Sokka pinching their noses and flinching from the stench.)

Sokka: You saved your Uncle's sweaty sandal?
Toph: I think it's kind of sweet. (Cut to June as she directs Nyla off screen. Cut to a side view of Zuko lifting the sandal out in front of Nyla's noise.)
June: Let's do this. (She pulls on Nyla's reins and camera zooms out to show Nyla running into the forest)
Zuko: Hey, wait up!

(The group proceeds to mount Appa as it lifts its tail up. Cut to an area behind Appa's tail as it slams the tail to the ground and takes off into the air. Cut to Nyla running up a rocky slope with Appa trying to catch up behind. Cut to the next day at some terraced flatland as Nyla rapidly runs down the terraces. Appa flies into screen shortly after. Cut to a frontal shot of Nyla with what looks like the Freedom Fighters hideout in the background. Cut to a side view of the partially destroyed outer wall of Ba Sing Se at night as Appa nears it. Cut to a close up of the rubble as Nyla runs into screen. Camera pans up at the opening in the wall as Appa flies into screen. Cut to an overhead view of the 2 animals as they pause in front of the opening.)

Zuko: We're going to Ba Sing Se?
June: (Cut to a close up sideview of the 2 creatures as Nyla scratches the rubble) Your Uncle's somewhere beyond the wall. (Nyla stops scratching the rubble and turns away) Nyla's getting twitchy so he can't be too far. Good luck.

(June pulls her reins and Nyla runs off screen. Cut to Zuko as he looks at the departing shirshu. He turns back to the camera with a slight annoyed expression on his face.)

Zuko: It's been a long day. (Cut to an overhead view of Appa) Let's camp and start our search again at dawn.

(Cut to some trees. Camera pans down to show Aang walking near a flower motif on the ground. Cut to a frontal shot of Aang as he walks towards the motif transfixed. Cut to an overhead view of the motif to show that it's a hexagonal shape.)

Aang: It's a hexagon. (Cut to a close up of Aang's feet as Momo jumps onto the ground and surveys it) It doesn't (Aang bends down and touches the ground) seem raises his arms in exasperation and walks away like normal rock. (He stands up and does an earthbending movement but nothing happens) It's not made of earth. This is so strange. (He sits down with his hands on his head in despair) I wish I had some help right now. I wish I had Roku. I do have Roku.

(Aang proceeds to sit up straight and inhales audibly. Cut to a close up of Aang deep in concentration. Cut to a side view of Aang as Momo scurries away. The light dims and a blue cloud of smoke comes out of Aang, moving across him and forms a human-like shape. The smoke takes shape into Avatar Roku sitting cross-legged and a blue aura-like mist surrounds him.)

Avatar Roku: You're right, Aang. (Cut to a close up of Roku) All the past Avatars, all their experience and wisdom, (he smiles) is available to you (Cut to Aang) if you look deep inside yourself.
Aang: (looking around) So where am I, Roku? What is this place?
Avatar Roku: (Cut to a puzzled Roku looking at the trees) I... don't know, Aang. (He looks back at Aang) But (Camera zooms in on the worried airbender) I see that you are lost in more ways than one right now.
Aang: I am. (He puts on a serious face) I need to figure out what to do once I face the Fire Lord.

(Cut to Zuko and Katara sleeping on Appa's side with their backs facing each other. Camera pans to the right to show Suki and Sokka sleeping on Appa's tail. Sokka snores audibly. Cut to Toph snoring in her earth tent as she suddenly wakes up and touches the ground. Cut to an overhead shot of her tent as it gets earthbended away. Camera pans out to show Appa as a ring of fire circles the group. Cut to an overhead shot of the circle. Camera pans across the backs of the group's heads. They turn their heads towards 4 people appearing at the top of the rubble in white and blue uniforms.

Camera zooms in on the group to show Piandao. Camera pans to the left to show Jeong Jeong, Pakku and then Bumi.)

Bumi: Well, look who's (throws his arms out from under his robe) here.

(Bumi snorts and laughs. Cut back to the group as Sokka and Katara who originally appeared worried smile with relief and they turn to look at each other. Suki, Toph and Zuko look at the siblings, puzzled. Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(Scene returns to an area in the sea looking at the forested area at night. Cut back to Aang talking to Roku at the hexagon.)

Aang: Everyone expects me to take the Fire Lord's life but I just don't know if I can do that.
Avatar Roku: (Camera slowly zooms in on Roku who closes his eyes) In my life, I tried to be disciplined and show restraint. But it backfired when (Cut to Sozin attacking Roku in The Avatar and the Fire Lord) Fire Lord Sozin took advantage of my restraint and mercy. If I had been more decisive (Cut to an aged Sozin looking at his fleet of soldiers and airships) and acted sooner, I could have stopped Sozin (Fade to 3 burning air temples seen in The Avatar and the Fire Lord) and stop the war (Fade to a close up of Sozin's face) before it started. (Cut back to the hexagon) I offer you this wisdom, Aang. (He raises a finger) You must be decisive.

(Cut to an area behind Roku's head as he dissipates to reveal a confused Aang. Camera slowly zooms in on Aang and he drops his head in deep thought.

Cut back to the outer wall of Ba Sing Se.)

Toph: What's going on? (Cut to an area behind the 4 men looking at the Gaang) We're surrounded by old people.
Katara: Not just any (She walks towards the masters) old people. These (Cut to a sideview shot of the 4 men) are great masters and friends of ours. (Camera pans down to Pakku as Katara stops in front of him and bows) Pakku.
Pakku: (Bowing in return) It is respectful to bow to an old master but how about a hug (opens his arms) for your new grandfather? (Cut to a close up of shocked Katara with an equally dumbfounded Sokka behind her. Katara's expression changes into happiness)
Katara: That's so exciting. (She opens her arms and embraces Pakku) You and Gran Gran must be so happy to have found each other again.
Pakku: I made her a (He touches an area below his collar bone) new betrothal necklace and everything. (Sokka comically enters the screen and hugs Pakku by the neck)
Sokka: Welcome to the family Great Gramp.
Pakku: You can still just call me (He pushes Sokka off him) Pakku.
Sokka: (Cut to Sokka who smiles goofily) How about Grand Pakku?
Pakku: (Cut to a serious Pakku) No. (Camera pans out to show a disappointed Sokka)
Katara: And this was (Camera pans up to show Jeong Jeong as Katara introduces Zuko to him) Aang's first firebending teacher. (Zuko walks towards him and Jeong Jeong bows)
Jeong Jeong: Jeong Jeong. (Cut to a side view shot of Sokka bowing to Piandao with Bumi looking on)
Sokka: Master Piandao.
Piandao: (Bowing in return) Hello, Sokka.
Suki: So wait, how do you all know each other?
Bumi: (Cut to a side view of the 4 masters) All old people know (Piandao looks towards Bumi and smiles) each other don't you know that? (Bumi snorts and laughs)
Piandao: We're all part of the same ancient secret society. A group that transcends the divisions of the 4 nations.
Zuko: (Cut to a smiling Zuko) The Order of the White Lotus.

(Cut to a frontal shot of Jeong Jeong and Piandao as Bumi comically slides into screen with a finger up in the air.)

Bumi: That's the one. (Bumi comically exits the screen)
Jeong Jeong: The White Lotus has always been about philosophy, and beauty and truth. (Cut to an overhead shot of the scene) About a month ago, a call went out that we were needed for something important.
Pakku: (Cut to an area behind Zuko's shoulder looking at Pakku and Katara) It came from a Grand Lotus, your Uncle, (Cut to a close up of a smiling Zuko) Iroh of the Fire Nation. (Camera pans out to show Toph behind him)
Toph: Well that's who we're looking for.
Piandao: (Cut back to a frontal shot of Jeong Jeong and Piandao again) Then we'll take you to him.
Bumi: (Bumi pushes apart their shoulders) Wait, someone's (looking around warily) missing from your group. Someone (He walks closer to the camera) very important. Where's (He presses his face near the camera) Momo? (Cut to a side view of Bumi pressing his face against Sokka's who leans back from the weight)
Sokka: He's gone. And so is Aang. (Camera zooms out to show the rest and Bumi takes a step back)
Bumi: Oh well, so long as they have each other I'm sure (He pats Sokka's shoulder as he still remains in a leaning position) we have nothing (Sokka flails his arms around to regain his balance) to worry about. Let's go.

(Bumi slams his hand against the ground and earthbends a tall column of earth and propels himself over the gap in the outer wall, laughing maniacally at the same time.

Cut back to an area in the sea looking at the forest area. Cut to a tree branch with Momo's ears popping out from both sides. Momo peeks out from behind the branch and flies off screen. Cut to a frontal shot of Aang in the lotus position as Momo lands behind him.)

Aang: Avatar Kyoshi, I need your wisdom.

(Momo appears frightened from behind Aang and scurries away. Cut to a close up of Aang. Cut to a sid view of Aang as a blue wisp of smoke comes out from him. Camera follows the trail of the smoke and it "solidifies" into Avatar Kyoshi. )

Avatar Kyoshi: In my day, (flashback to Chin confronting Kyoshi from the memory shown in Avatar Day) Chin the Conqueror threatened to throw the World out of balance. (More memories of Kyoshi creating Kyoshi Island is shown) I stopped him and the World entered a great era of peace.
Aang: (voice over) But you didn't really kill Chin, (A memory of Chin falling to his death is shown) technically he fell to his own doom because (Cut back to present day Aang) he was too stubborn to get out of the way.
Avatar Kyoshi: (Cut to a close up side view of a serious Kyoshi) Personally I don't really see the difference but I assure you, I would have done whatever it took to stop Chin. (Switch to Aang's point of view looking at Kyoshi) I offer you this wisdom, Aang. (She begins to slowly shrink into white puff of smoke) Only justice will bring peace. (The smoke finally dissipates. Cut to an annoyed Aang who leans back and thinks.)
Aang: I knew I shouldn't have asked Kyoshi.

(Cut to Appa and the rest of the group walking down a rocky path inside Ba Sing Se.)

Sokka: So Bumi, (Cut to an overhead shot of Bumi, Sokka, Zuko and Suki walking) how did you end up escaping your imprisonment in Omashu?
Bumi: Escape? I didn't escape, everybody else escaped. (He throws his arms into the air) There I was, (Cut to a close up frontal shot of Bumi) back in Omashu, waiting for just the right (flashback to a view looking at Omashu from the outside with the Fire Nation banner still hanging at the entrance of the city) moment. I didn't know (Cut to a close up frontal shot of Bumi's head peeking out of the porthole in the coffin seen in Return to Omashu) what or when but I knew I'd know it when I knew it. (Bumi lifts his head up and camera pans down to show him looking at the eclipsed Sun above Ozai's statue) An eclipse. That would do it.

(He takes a deep breath and struggles. Cut to a roof in the city as the structure begins to crack and break. Some of the bricks and roof tiles start to fly upwards. Cut to a far view of Bumi's coffin as the bricks and tiles fly towards it. Cut to an overhead frontal shot of the coffin as the debris breaks open the door of the coffin on contact.

Cut to an area below the coffin as the door drops into screen followed shortly by Bumi who lands in a crouch. He stands up and 5 Fire Nation soldiers run into screen and position themselves in a stance opposite Bumi.)

Fire Nation soldier:What do you (Camera zooms in on the soldier) think you're doing?

(The soldier thrusts a fist out but nothing happens. He looks at his hand curiously and he and the rest of his group thrust their fists out but nothing happens. The soldiers appear stunned. Cut to Bumi who first appears puzzled but then he smiles with realization.)

Bumi: Taking back my city. You've got no (His moves one arm across his body) fire power and it's payback time.

(He rushes off screen. Cut to Bumi riding a small wave of earth and by passing the line of soldiers. He propels himself off the edge and lands down in the city as he raises his arm up. A tall column of earth is bended behind him. Cut to a Fire Nation building built into the city via metal pipings. The column of earth pierces through the pipes. Cut to Bumi as he lowers his hands in a diagonal position. Cut to a far side view of the scene as the building is slowly moved away by the column of earth.

Cut to a group of soldiers running away as camera pans up to Omashu's mail slides to show a Fire Nation building with smoke still coming out from the chimney behind the slides slowly sliding down and hitting another similar building. Cut to Bumi who runs into screen and earthbends more Fire Nation houses away. Cut to a full view of Omashu to show smoke slowly sliding down the cone shaped structure like an avalanche. Cut to the entrance of Omashu as the soldiers flee from the city.

Cut back to Bumi inside the city as he looks up at the statue of Ozai perched right at the top of the Omashu. Cut to a frontal shot of Bumi with 8 soldiers charging in with weapons behind him. He earthbends 8 columns of earth from the ground which knocks the soldiers off their feet. He then sends the columns flying into the air.

Cut to a close up of the face of Ozai's statue as 2 columns pierce both his eyes. 2 more columns fly into screen and pierce the nostrils and the remaining chunks line across his mouth like a smile. Cut to the base of the statue as it gets lifted from the ground. Cut to Bumi who is holding his breath and struggling with the weight of the statue as he attempts to bend it. Cut to a shot of the statue being tipped over the edge and sliding down the city. Cut to a full side view of the bridge leading to the city as the remaining soldiers evacuate. Ozai's statue slides into screen and crashes through the city's entrance, the bridge and finally falling down into the depths outside the city.

Cut to Bumi who is looking down at the disappearing statue as he laughs manically to himself and bites off a piece of green genemite crystal.

Cut back to a frontal shot of present day Bumi with the kids behind him.)

Suki: Wow, you took back your whole city all by yourself.
Bumi: So what about you guys? Did you do anything interesting on the day of the eclipse? (Cut to Sokka and Zuko who look at each other before Zuko turns his head away)
Zuko: Nah.
Sokka: No, not really.

(Cut to Aang thinking deeply with his hands on his head.)

Aang: I need to look deep inside myself.

(He gets into the lotus position and concentrates. Camera slowly zooms in on a meditating Aang. Cut to a sideview of Aang as a blue cloud of smoke comes out from Aang and Avatar Kuruk in Water Tribe gear "solidifies" in front of him.)

Avatar Kuruk: (Cut to a close up of Kuruk) I am Avatar Kuruk. When I was young, (Flashback to a young Kuruk's face) I was always (Camera zooms out to show him surfing the waves with a wooden board) a "go with the flow" kind of Avatar. People seemed to work out their own problems (Cut to the blue sky and camera pans down to an icy landscape) and there was peace and (Camera pans down some more to show Kuruk and Ummi sitting side by side) good times in the World. (Ummi grabs Kuruk's hand and they lean in for a kiss) But then, (Cut to Koh's centipede-like body circling around the Spirit World) I lost the woman I loved to Koh, (Koh's head comes into screen but its eye lid is still closed) the face stealer. (The eye lid opens to show Ummi's face. Cut back to the present day to show a sorrowful Kuruk) It was my fault, if I had been more attentive and more active, I could have saved her. Aang, you must actively shape your own destiny, and (His form slowly diminishes into white smoke like Kyoshi) the destiny of the World.

(The smoke dissipates. Cut back to Aang who brings his hands to his head in despair.

Cut to the inner wall of Ba Sing Se. Camera pans down to show Appa and the group who are still walking. Cut to inside a campsite with sheltered tents everywhere as the walls surrounding it gets bended down to show Bumi with the rest behind him.)

Bumi: Well, here we are. (He walks into camp) Welcome to old people camp. (Cut to Jeong Jeong, Piandao, Zuko and Pakku who walk in while Zuko looks around.)
Zuko: Where... where is he?
Piandao: Your Uncle's in (he points out) there, (Cut to Piandao's point of view as he points to a big sheltered tent at the end of campsite) Prince Zuko.

(Cut to Zuko who stares with disbelief and awkwardness. Cut to a back view of Zuko as he walks towards Iroh's tent. He pauses outside the tent and sits down. Katara walks into screen and stands beside him.)

Katara: Are you okay?
Zuko: No, (turning his head away from Katara) I'm not okay. My Uncle hates me, I know it. (Katara lowers herself to the ground) He loved me and supported me in every way he could and I still turned against him. How can I even face him? (Cut to a sideview of a regretful Zuko with Katara looking on.)
Katara: Zuko, you're sorry for what you did, right?
Zuko: More sorry than I've been about anything in my entire life.
Katara: (raises her shoulders) Then he'll forgive you. (Zuko looks at her) He will.

(Zuko turns his head back towards the tent and thinks for a while before standing up. Cut to the front of the tent as Zuko walks into screen. He pauses and takes a deep breath before pushing the curtains aside and stepping in. Cut to an overhead view of the entrance inside Iroh's tent as Zuko walks in.)

Zuko: Uncle.

(Cut to a close up of Zuko with his eyes closed. A loud snore greets him and he opens his eyes and looks up. Cut to a close up of Iroh sleeping soundly and snoring loudly. Cut to Zuko who smiles with affection and he proceeds to sit down on the mat beside Iroh's sleeping mat.

Cut to an overhead view of the forested area in the ocean as the camera slowly zooms in.)

Aang: (off screen) All these past Avatars, (Cut to a frontal shot of Aang with Momo beside him) they keep telling me I'm gonna have to do it. They don't get it. (Momo stands on Aang's lap and makes some animal noises. Aang turns back to his furry friend.) You're right, maybe an air nomad Avatar would understand where I'm coming from. (Cut to a close up of Momo's puzzled face as it purrs. Cut back to a frontal shot of Aang as Momo jumps to Aang's other side.) I know you can't really talk. Pretending you can just helps me think. (Aang gets into a meditating position. Momo makes some animal sounds and Aang opens his eyes and looks slightly irritated at Momo.) I'm going to pretend I didn't pretend to hear that.

(Cut to a close up of Aang's face. Cut back to frontal shot of Aang as Momo's ears stand up. Another white-blue cloud of smoke comes out from Aang and moves towards the screen. Cut to a slight overhead view of the scene behind Aang's back as the spirit of Yangchen manifests in front of Aang. Momo scurries away frightened.)

Avatar Yangchen: I am Avatar Yangchen, (Cut to a close up sideview of the air nomad Avatar) young airbender.
Aang: (off screen) Avatar Yangchen, the monks always (Cut to a close up of Aang who raises his shoulders and looks at the surrounding trees) taught me that all life is sacred. Even the life of the tiniest spider-fly caught in its own web.
Avatar Yangchen: (Cut to Yangchen who nods in agreement reluctantly) Yes, all life is sacred.
Aang: (Cut to Aang who appears optimistic since someone finally shares his views) I know, I'm (points to self) even a vegetarian. I've always tried to solve my problems by being quick or clever and I've only had to use violence for necessary defence and I've certainly (shakes his head) never used it to take a life.
Avatar Yangchen: (off screen) Avatar Aang, (Cut to an area behind Aang's head as camera pans up to show Yangchen talking to him) I know that you're a gentle spirit and the monks have taught you well. But this isn't about you, (Cut to a close up side view of a Aang in disbelief) this is about the World.
Aang: But the monks taught me that I had to detach myself from the World so my spirit could be free.
Avatar Yangchen: (Camera pans across the sideview of the 2 airbenders) Many great and wise air nomads have detached themselves and achieved spiritual enlightenment but the Avatar (Cut to a frontal shot of Yangchen) can never do it because your sole duty is to the World. Here is my wisdom for you, (Cut to a frontal shot of a shocked Aang) selfless duty (Camera slowly zooms out) calls you to sacrifice your own spiritual needs and do whatever (Camera pauses behind Yangchen's back as she begins to dissipate) it takes to protect the World.

(The smoke clears and Momo peeks its head out from a tree trunk behind Aang as he drops his head. Cut to an overhead view of Aang as Momo crawls into screen.)

Aang: (He looks at Momo) I guess I don't have a choice, Momo. (He looks up towards the sky and Momo ears droop) I have to kill the Fire Lord.

(Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(Scene returns to the next morning to an overhead view of the Order of The White Lotus' campsite. Cut to an overhead view of Iroh's tent as Zuko is still sitting beside a snoring Iroh. He stops snoring and starts to get up. Cut to a frontal shot of Iroh as he yawns and stretches. He turns his head slightly and notices Zuko's presence but he then turns his head back and does not say anything. Cut to Zuko who struggles to control his emotions. Cut to an area behind Iroh's head with his face slightly visible. His eyes are closed. Cut to a frontal shot of Iroh with Zuko visible behind him but his eyes can't be seen as they're above the camera's lens.)

Zuko: Uncle, I know you must have mixed feelings about seeing me. (Cut back to a shot behind Iroh) But I want (Cut to a frontal shot of Zuko with his closed but tears are visibly brimming under both eye lids. His voice cracks slightly) you to know, I'm so (He shakes his head) so sorry, Uncle. (Zuko opens his eyes and looks towards Iroh) I'm so sorry and ashamed of what I did. (tears flow down his cheeks) I don't know (He closes his eyes again and shakes his head) how I can ever make it up to you but (He looks up and Iroh's arm enters the screen and grabs Zuko's sleeve and pulls him off screen) I'll...

(Cut to a sideview shot of the two of them as Iroh pulls Zuko into a comforting hug. Cut to a frontal shot of a crying Uncle who smiles.)

Zuko: (Cut to a frontal shot of Zuko who is still crying) How can you forgive me so easily? I thought you would be furious with me.
Iroh: I was never angry with you. I was sad (He brings a hand up to the back of Zuko's head) because I was afraid you lost your way.
Zuko: (Cut back to a side view shot of the scene) I did lose my way. (Both of them part and Iroh places his hands on Zuko's shoulders)
Iroh: But you found it again. (Zuko raises his head to look at his Uncle. Cut to a frontal shot of a smiling Iroh) And you did it by yourself. And (Switch to a frontal shot of an emotional Zuko) I am so happy you found your way here. (Zuko smiles and Iroh pulls him back into a hug again. Cut to a side view of the two.)
Zuko: It wasn't that hard, Uncle. (Zuko raises his arms and hugs Iroh) You have a pretty strong scent.

(Cut to a squirrel scurrying along a tree branch with sunlight shining through the canopy. Cut to an overhead view of the hexagon to show a sleeping Aang and Momo. White birds fly into screen. Cut to a close up of Aang as he opens his eyes. He yawns and pushes himself off the ground. He looks up ahead slightly startled.)

Aang: Wait, (Switch to Aang's point of view as some mountains at the edge of the sea increase in size) is it just me or are those mountains getting bigger?

(Cut back to Aang as Momo lands on his shoulder with a purr. Aang jumps up off screen. Cut to an overhead shot of the emergent layer. Aang jumps into screen and lands on top of the tallest tree. Momo flies into screen and lands on Aang's shoulder. Cut to a close up of Aang as they look on. Aang turns his head back and camera pans to the left to show some churning currents on the surface of the water behind the forested area.)

Aang: They're not getting larger, they're getting closer. (Aang jumps off screen. Cut to a side shot of Aang hopping across the forest floor with Momo flying closely behind him.) The whole island is moving!

(Cut to an area in the sea beside the forested area. A shadow can be seen under the water directly beneath the forested area. Aang jumps into water. Cut to underwater as Aang dives in. Cut to a branch as Momo lands on it, looking at the water and chittering away. Camera follows Aang swimming deeper down the dark shape in the water. Cut to a frontal shot of Aang as he looks up at the shape. A rumble vibrates in the water and Aang looks down. Cut to a side view of the shape as gargantuan reptilian claw paddles into screen, creating a lot of bubbles. Cut to a transfixed Aang with a swirl of bubble beneath him as he swims up. Cut to the surface of the water as Aang resurfaces with a gasp. He rubs his eyes and Momo flies into screen and lands on a tree trunk near the edge of the water, looking at Aang.)

Aang: (facing the lemur) It's amazing, Momo! (He raises his arms out of the water and opens them to the sides) The biggest animal in the World! (pointing forward) I've got to swim around and find its face.

(He proceeds to swim off screen with a freestyle stroke. Momo flies above the water above his master. Cut to an overhead view of Aang and Momo. Cut to an area behind the forested area as it swims itself closer to the mountains.

Cut to an overhead view of the Order of the White Lotus' camp as the various members are already out of their tents for breakfast.)

Zuko: (off screen) Uncle, you're the only person other than the Avatar (Cut to a sideview of Iroh with Zuko and Toph looking on at him. All of them are eating) who can possibly defeat the Father Lord.
Toph: (points her chopsticks towards Zuko's arm) You mean the Fire Lord.
Zuko: That's what I just said. (Toph resumes eating)
Iroh: Hmm...
Zuko: We need you to come with us.
Iroh: (Cut to a frontal shot of Iroh as he lowers his chopsticks) No, Zuko. It won't turn out well. (Cut to an overhead shot of the group sitting round a small steaming pot in a circle)
Zuko: You can beat him and we'll (turns his head towards his friends) be there to help.
Iroh: (Cut back to a frontal shot of Iroh) Even if I did defeat Ozai, and I don't know that (he raises an eyebrow) I could. It will be the wrong way to end the war. (Switch back to an overhead view of the group) History would see it as just more senseless violence, (Camera slowly zooms in) a brother killing a brother to grab power. The only way for this war to end peacefully is for the Avatar to defeat the Fire Lord.
Zuko: (Cut to an area behind Iroh looking at a thinking Zuko) And then... then would you come and take your rightful place on the throne?
Iroh: (Cut to a frontal shot of Iroh) No. Someone (He turns his head towards his nephew) new must take the throne. An idealist with a pure heart and (Camera slowly zooms in on Zuko) unquestionable honour. It has to be you, (Zuko appears surprised) Prince Zuko.
Zuko: (looking to the side in disbelief) Unquestionable honour? But I've made (raises his shoulders) so many mistakes.
Iroh: (off screen) Yes, you have. (Cut to an area behind Zuko's head looking at Iroh addressing him) You struggled, you suffered but you have always followed your own path, you (Cut to a close up of Zuko) restored your own honour. And only you (the Fire Prince looks down in thought) can restore the honour of the Fire Nation.
Zuko: I'll try, Uncle.
Toph: (Switch to a side view of Toph with Sokka in the background) Well, (Sokka turns towards Toph) what if Aang doesn't come back? (Camera returns back to an overhead shot of the group)
Iroh: Sozin's Comet is arriving and our destinies are upon us. Aang will face the Fire Lord. (Cut to a close up of Iroh) When I was a boy, I had a vision that I would one day take Ba Sing Se. (Camera pans across the various members of the Gaang) Only now do I see that my destiny is to take it back from the Fire Nation so the Earth Kingdom can be free again.
Suki: (Cut to Suki and Katara) That's why you gathered (raises an arm out) the members of the White Lotus.
Iroh: Yes. (Katara turns her head back to Iroh) Zuko, (return back to a close up of Iroh addressing Zuko again) you must return to the Fire Nation so that when the Fire Lord falls, you can assume the throne and restore peace and order. (Cut to a close up of an attentive Zuko) But Azula will be there, waiting (Zuko frowns) for you.
Zuko: (confidently) I can handle Azula.
Iroh: (off screen) Not alone. (Zuko appears startled) You'll need help.
Zuko: You're right. (He looks up) Katara, (Cut to an area behind Zuko looking at Katara as she raises her head up) how would you like to help me put Azula in her place?
Katara: (smiles) It would be my pleasure.
Sokka: (off screen) What (Zuko and Katara turn towards Sokka) about us? (Cut to a sideview of Toph with Sokka in the background) What's (he raises his arms out curiously) our destiny today?
Iroh: (Cut to a frontal shot of Iroh who quirks an eyebrow) What do you think it is?
Sokka: (Cut back to Sokka with his hand on his chin in thought) I think that... even though we don't know where Aang is, we need to do (he slams his left fist into his right palm) everything we can to stop the airship fleet. (Camera pans to the left to show Toph)
Toph: And that means when Aang does face the Fire Lord, we'll be right there if he needs us.

(She smacks both of her fists together. Cut to a smiling Iroh. Cut to the rocky regions in between the walls of Ba Sing Se as Toph and Suki appear unsteadily into screen. They are seated on a saddle mounted onto a green creature. Camera zooms out to show a giant lizard-like creature with Piandao briefing Sokka at the bottom.)

Piandao: Nothing runs faster over land or swims quicker than a giant eel-hound. (Piandao hands Sokka a scroll) The airship base is on a small island just off the EarthKingdom shore. (Sokka unrolls the scroll to show a map ofthe Earth Kingdom) You should be able (Cut to an area behind Piandao's shoulder looking at Sokka) to intercept the fleet within a day's journey. (Sokka lowers the scroll and rolls it back off screen)
Sokka: Thank you, Master.

(Cut to a full view of master and pupil as they bow to each other. Sokka hugs Piandao by the waist to his surprise and Piandao lowers his arm to Sokka's shoulders assuringly. Camera pans to the right to show various Order of the White Lotus members sending off Appa, Zuko and Katara.)

Zuko: So if I'm going to be Fire Lord after the war is over, what are you going to do?
Iroh: (Cut to a slight overhead frontal shot of Iroh) After I re-conquer Ba Sing Se, (he brings out a white lotus tile from his belt) I'm going to re-conquer (he flips the tile into the air like a coin and catches it back) my tea shop and I'm going (he gazes at the tile) to play Pai Sho (he brings the tile closer to his belly) everyday.

(Cut to a smiling Zuko with Katara behind him in the saddle. Both of them look across. Cut to Sokka and Suki who are looking back at them. Sokka nods. Cut to an overhead shot of the eel-hound and Appa with the various members bidding them farewell.)

Katara: (off screen) Goodbye, General Iroh.
Iroh: Goodbye, everyone. (Cut to a frontal shot of Iroh looking up at his nephew) Today, (he closes his eyes and lowers his head) destiny is our friend. (he opens his eyes and looks back up again) I know it.

(Cut to an overhead shot again as the eel-hound turns around and takes off. Appa slams his tail against the ground and flies off. The members can be seen waving goodbye below.

Cut to the unseen reptilian creature still making its way towards the mountains. Cut to a view of the trees on the creature's back as the camera pans down to the water to show Aang swimming into screen. He pauses and takes a deep breath before diving under. Cut to underwater to show intricate patterns on the creature's shell as Aang swims towards the shell, leaving a trail of bubbles behind him

Cut to an overhead view of the circular patterns on the shell as Aang stops in front of the creature's closed eye lid. Aang looks around warily. The eye lid opens behind him and Aang spins around to face the eye. Cut to a frontal shot of a surprised Aang as he gets lifted upwards by the creature's claw. Cut to a close up frontal shot of Aang as he struggles against the water pressure.

Cut to the water's surface as the creature's brownish head emerges followed shortly by his claw with Aang standing on it. Camera zooms out to show an overhead view of the lion turtle which has an overgrowth of trees on his back.)

Aang: A lion turtle. (Cut to an overhead view of Aang as he bows) Maybe you can (Cut to an area behind the lion turtle's claw with its face in the background) help me. Everyone, (the lion turtle blinks) even my own past lives are expecting me to end someone's life. But I don't know if I can do it.
Lion Turtle: (Cut to an area behind Aang's back as the massive lion turtle moves its mouth to speak) The true mind can weather all the lies and illusions without being lost. The true heart (Cut to a frontal shot of a confused Aang) can touch the poison of hatred without being harmed. (Cut to a close up of the lion turtle's eye) Since beginningless time, (Cut to a side view shot as it raises a claw out of the water) darkness thrives in the void, (Cut to a close up side view of Aang as 2 claws touch Aang's forehead and chest) but always yields to purifying light.

(Green light illuminates the whole screen once the lion turtle makes contact with Aang and he widens his eyes with realization. Cut to a sideview of a cliff as the lion turtle's claw comes into screen and brings Aang close to the edge of the cliff. Aang steps off and Momo flies in and lands on Aang's shoulder. Cut to the back view of Aang looking down at the lion turtle.)

Lion Turtle: Wait for him, he will come.

(The lion turtle drops back into the water and Aang bows. Cut to an overhead view of the sea to show the lion turtle slowly backing away from the mountains. Cut back to Aang and Momo as Aang looks at the lemur before jumping off screen.

Cut to night at a volcano. Cut to a frontal shot of Ozai's face in his Phoenix King headgear.)

Ozai: It's time for this World to end in fire and for a new World (Camera zooms out to show the air fleet behind him) to be born from the ashes.

(Cut to the Earth's atmosphere as the white Sozin's comet brushes against it and the whole atmosphere glows red hot while the comet burns a bright orange. Cut to a back view of Ozai looking at the horizon as it slowly turns red. Cut to Aang standing on top of a pillar looking ahead. Cut to the comet as it burns fiercely through its journey across the atmosphere. Cut to a frontal shot of a serious Aang. Camera pans up to show the approaching comet shining brightly from behind some mountains. Fade to white.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(The episode opens with an overhead shot from high up as Sozin's Comet streaks over the ground, its red energy destroying the clouds in its path. Cut to a close up of the comet from the front. Cut to a shot of Appa flying in the air. Cut to a closer shot of Zuko and Katara riding on top.)

Katara: Zuko, don't worry, we can take Azula.
Zuko: I'm not worried about her, I'm worried about Aang. What if he doesn't have the guts to take out my Father? What if he loses?
Katara: Aang won't lose. He's gonna come back. He has to.

(Zuko looks forward as the scene fades to a shot of the Fire Nation palace. Cut to a shot of Azula's hair being combed from the back. Cut to a shot of Azula's heel being scrubbed. Cut to a wider shot showing three servant girls grooming Azula, and one other kneeling and holding a bowl of cherries up to her. Azula takes a cherry and begins to chew it. The camera cuts to a close up of her. It then zooms in as a crunching noise is heard and Azula opens her eyes in surprise. Azula spits the pit of the cherry into her palm and shows it to the servant girl serving the cherries.)

Azula: (sternly) What am I holding?
Servant Girl: (quietly) A cherry pit, Princess.
Azula: Correct. And what day is this?
Servant Girl: It is the day of your coronation.
Azula: Yes, it is. So please, tell me why on the most important day of my life you decided to leave a pit in my cherry? (Glares at the pit between her fingers and throws it at the servant girl's head)
Servant Girl: It wasn't a decision. It was just a small mistake.
Azula: Small? Do you realize what could have happened if I hadn't sensed the pit in time? (the other servant girls look to the one with the cherries, worried)
Servant Girl: I supposed you could have... choked?
Azula: Yes. Then you will understand the severity of your crime.
Servant Girl: (bowing her head to the floor) I understand, Princess. Please, forgive me.
Azula: (nonchalant) Oh very well. Since this is a special day, I will show mercy. (the servant smiles, relieved) You are banished. Leave this palace immediately. (the servant stands up and slowly walks backwards off screen, keeping her head down) What are you all looking at? I have two feet that need scrubbing. And make sure you get in between the toes. (holds the foot scrubber up to the camera with her toes) I won't have my first day as Fire Lord marred by poor foot hygiene.

(The scene cuts to a body of water. The camera tilts up to show the eel hound swimming through it with Sokka, Toph, and Suki riding on top. A bright red light is seen on the horizon behind them.)

Suki: It's weird to say, but the comet actually looks beautiful.
Toph: Too bad the Fire Lord is about to use it to destroy the World.

(The camera follows them and zooms out, showing them heading toward land in the distance. The scene fades to a shot of the eel hound reaching shore. The passengers dismount and continue on. Cut to a shot of them climbing up a hill to the edge of a cliff. Cut to an overhead shot of them reaching the top to find Fire Nation airships beginning to take off, with Ozai's giant airship leading.)

Sokka: We're too late! The fleet's already taking off!
Toph: Then we're taking off too. Where's the closest airship?
Sokka: It's right...

(Before Sokka can answer, Toph grabs him and Suki by the back of their shirts and catapults the three of them into the air by bending a pillar of rock up from underneath them. They are flung high into the air, and then slowly fall towards an airship. Sokka and Suki land on the airship's catwalk while catching Toph in the fall.)
Toph: Ugh.

(Cut to a shot of the three of them climbing up a ladder and into the main body of the airship. The camera pulls back and rotates around to the front of the airship fleet. It continues to pull back until it has reached the front of Ozai's ship, rotating around and zooming in on Ozai as he stands on the front platform, wearing his Phoenix King armour and grinning.

The scenes cuts to Dai Li agents walking forward in the Fire Nation throne room, where Azula is seated, surrounded by blue flames. The approach Azula and kneel before her.)

Dai Li Agent: You sent for us, Princess? Is everything alright?
Azula: (irritated) Actually, everything's not alright. Do you know how long it took you to get here?
Dai Li Agent: A... few minutes I guess?
Azula: Five, to be precise. In which time an assassin could have snuck in, done away with me and been on his merry way.
Dai Li Agent: My apologies, Princess.
Azula: Is this how you plan to treat your new Fire Lord? With tardiness and disloyalty?
Dai Li Agent: The Dai Li would never betray you.
Azula: And I'm sure that's just what you told Long Feng before you turned against him and joined me. You're all banished! (the camera quickly zooms out from the Dai Li agents as the look up, shocked)
Dai Li Agent: But...
Azula: (offscreen) Goodbye.

(The lead agent takes one last glare at Azula before getting up and walking away. The other agents follow after.)

Azula: Please send in the next group on your way out.

(Cut to a shot of Azula. The camera zooms in on her as she tilts her head down and glares just before the scene cuts to a wide, overhead shot of the Fire Nation air fleet flying over the ocean. Cut to a close shot of one airship's cabin from the outside, and then cut to a shot of the door leading into the cabin. Sokka and Suki slowly walk towards it and put their backs to the wall next to the door.)

Sokka: Shh.

(Toph walks up to the door and raises her hand to it. Cut to a shot of inside the cabin where three pilots and the captain are standing. They hear a knock from the door, in the same rhythm of 'shave and a haircut.' The camera cuts to a shot of the door from their side. On the last knock, the door is knocked down by Toph kicking it. Immediately after, Toph falls forward on to the fallen door and rolls, using metal bending to cover the metal door all around her body like armour. A fire blast hits Toph, but she is unharmed. Cut to a shot of the captain looking surprised. He punches and sends another fireball at Toph, but she rolls backwards to avoid the attack, and in the same movement kicks her leg into the air, which bends the sheet of metal the captain is standing on up and through the ceiling. One of the firebenders shoots a fire blast at Toph, who shields herself with the metal plates on the floor. Cut to Sokka and Suki as they both dodge to the sides of the door, avoiding the fire blast which has been strengthened by the comet.

Cut back to the inside of the cabin as the flames die down. Toph jumps up from behind her shield and kicks to the side, bending a large metal pipe on the ceiling towards one of the firebenders and pinning him to the wall. She swings her leg to the other side and bends part of the metal floor up at another firebender just as he attacks, which pins him to the other wall. From her back, Toph springs upwards and clings to the ceiling. She begins crawling towards the front of the cabin. The last remaining firebender shoots a fire blast at Toph but misses. Toph jumps down from the ceiling behind the firebender. He swings his arm around to catch Toph with a fiery whip attack, but she blocks his arm with her armour covered arm. Cut to a shot outside the cabin as the firebender's
blocked attack bursts through a window. Back in the cabin, the firebender holds his forearm painfully. Just as he looks back up to Toph, she delivers a straight punch to his face. Sokka and Suki watch as he flies through the door and hits the wall off screen. Cut to a shot of Sokka and Suki peeping into the cabin, the firebender knocked out behind them. They walk into the cabin, which is now mangled due to Toph's metal bending. Toph peels the metal from around her head, then quickly sheds the rest of the makeshift armour off her body.)

Toph: That's how it's done.
Sokka: Good work, Toph. Time to take control of the ship. Take the wheel.
Toph: (sarcastically) That's a great idea! Let the blind girl steer the giant airship.
Sokka: I was talking to Suki.
Toph: That would make a lot more sense.
Suki: (taking the wheel) What are we going to do about the rest of the crew?
Sokka: Take us down closer to the water. I've got an idea.

(Sokka looks around the cabin, and then grabs a speaker connected to a tube.)

Sokka: (clears his throat and begins imitating a captain's voice) Attention crew, this is your Captain speaking. Everyone please report to the bomb bay immediately for hot cakes and... sweet cream. We have a very special birthday to celebrate.

(Cut to the engineers of the airship loading coal into the engines. They stop what they are doing and begin walking off once they hear Sokka's announcement. Cut to a shot of the airship descending towards the water below. Cut to a shot of the airship crew all gathered in the bomb bay. The camera pans right until it comes to an elite firebender and an engineer. The firebender turns to the engineer.)

Elite Firebender #1: Hey. I'm Quin Lee, I work up in communications.
Engineer: Oh hi, I work down in the engine room. It's probably why we've never met before. Big airship, you know?
Elite Firebender #1: Huh.
Engineer: Yep.
Elite Firebender #1: So, do you know whose birthday it is?
Elite Firebender #2: (approaching the firebender and engineer from behind) I can't believe the Captain remembered my birthday! He really does care.

(Immediately after the sentence is finished, the bomb bay doors open and they are dropped into the ocean. Cut to a shot from above of the doors opening below, then a shot from the side of the airship of the crew falling into the water. The firebenders that Toph had taken out can also be seen falling out of the cabin. Cut to the water's level as some of the crew comes up for air.)

Engineer: Happy Birthday.

(Cut to a shot of Ozai's airship from below. The camera pulls back through the broken window of the cabin as Sokka walks toward it, looking up at the other airship with Suki. Cut to a close up of Sokka and zoom in.)

Sokka: Fire Lord Ozai, here we come.

(Cut to a shot of Sokka grabbing the throttle and pushing it forward. Cut to a shot of Ozai. The camera pans right until he is in the center. Cut to commercial.)



Act II

(The show returns to a shot of the Fire Nation royal palace. Cut to a shot of Azula at the throne, lying against one of the pillars that surround it. She looks left just as footsteps are heard. Cut to a shot of Lo and Li walking towards the throne.)

Li: Azula, we heard what happened. Why have you banished all your servants?
Lo: All your Dai Li agents?
Li: And the Imperial firebenders?
Azula: None of them could be trusted. Sooner or later, they all would have betrayed me. Just like Mai and Ty Lee did.
Li & Lo: Azula, we are concerned for you and your well being.
Azula: (glares at Lo and Li) My Father asked you to come here and talk to me, didn't he He thinks I can't handle the responsibility of being Fire Lord. But I will be the greatest leader in Fire Nation history.
Lo: I'm sure you will. But considering everything that has happened today...
Li: Perhaps it's best you postponed your coronation.
Azula: (angrily) What?! Which one of you just said that?

(Lo and Li both point at each other.)

Azula: What a shame. There's only one way to resolve this. You two must duel each other. I order you to fight an Agni Kai.
Lo: But...
Li & Lo: We're not firebenders.
Azula: Alright, fine. (Pointing to Li) Lo, you're banished.(Pointing to Lo) Li, you can stay. (walks off screen)
Li: But I'm Li. So who's banished?

(Lo shrugs at Li. The scene cuts to an overhead shot of Ba Sing Se as Fire Nation tanks roll through the streets towards the main gate. Cut to a shot of the main gate as the tanks line up. The camera tilts up past the inner wall and focuses on three giant stone platforms in the distance, where the members of the Order of the White Lotus have gathered. Cut to a shot of a flag of the Order of the White lotus billowing in the wind. Cut to a shot of Jeong Jeong, Bumi, Pakku, and Piandao from the side, panning right.)

Bumi: Ba Sing Se, the Order of the White Lotus is here.
Pakku: Here to set you free.

(Cut to a shot of Iroh standing in front of the other Order members, tilting up.)

Iroh: Only once every hundred years can a firebender experience this kind of power.

(Iroh inhales deeply through his nose and the scene fades to a shot of Sozin's Comet. The scene fades back to the same shot of Iroh as he exhales, and a ring of flame appears around the group. Iroh continues to breathe deeply, and each time he inhales, the flames grow larger. Cut to a shot above and behind the group. The ring of fire around them continues top grow more intense, pulsing with each of Iroh's breaths. Cut back to the shot of Iroh. He opens his eyes and raises his arms. The camera zooms out as he thrusts his hands forward and gives a battle cry. The flames surrounding him converge into one giant ball of fire. A sound can be heard as the fireball gains energy, just before it is unleashed forward as a massive fire blast. The attack rockets forward and demolished the wall in front of it. Debris flies everywhere, landing amongst the Fire Nation tanks. Cut to the frontal shot of the five old masters. Bumi hops forward and stomps the ground. The three stone platforms the Order members are standing on begin to quickly slide towards Ba Sing Se. Cut to a shot from behind the destroyed section of the wall as fire blasts are shot at the Order members, only to be deflected. Cut to a shot of Iroh deflected the attacks. The old masters all leap off of the stone platform.

Cut to a shot of an alleyway. Pakku jumps up from behind a building and onto its roof. He bends a enormous wave of water over the building and down towards the Fire Nation soldiers below. Cut to a close up of Pakku. The camera tilts up to the peak of the wave as Piandoa leaps over it. Cut to the previous shot as Pakku turns the wave into ice, freezing the soldiers in place. Piandao slides down the frozen wave and slashes the ends of the soldier's spears, followed closely behind by Pakku. As they slide into another street, Pakku unfreezes the water, bends it up in front of him and freezes it again to block an incoming fire blast. The ice barrier is destroyed, and another fire blast is about to hit Pakku when a great wall of fire erupts in front of him, stopping the attack.

The camera quickly tilts up towards Jeong Jeong, the one who created the wall of fire, floating in the air using firebending to create fire jets beneath his feet. Jeong Jeong turns to another street. A line of tanks begin to fire on him, but he stops the attacks with another wall of fire. The camera cuts to a wide shot to show him hovering over a large intersection of streets, with tanks surrounding him. He hovers toward another street and creates another wall of fire to block an attack. Jeong Jeong waves his arms in the air and thrusts them forward, sending the wall of fire down the street and towards the tanks, pushing them back. More tanks begin to fire on him from another street, but Jeong Jeong repeats his last actions, creating a wall of flame and attacking the tanks with it. The tanks can be seen knocked over and in a pile as the wall of fire pushes another tank into the pile.

The scene cuts to Azula standing in front of a large mirror. Cut to a close up of her hair as she pulls it into a top knot. She takes a red ribbon and begins to tie it. She looks up at her reflection and sees that her finger is caught in the knot. Frustrated, she yanks he finger out and grabs a pair of scissors from the table next to her.)

Azula: Alright hair, it's time to face your doom.

(Azula grabs the bangs hanging in front of her face. Cut to a close up of the scissors as she lifts them in the air. Cut to a close up of her bangs as they are cut, then to an overhead shot of the hair falling to Azula's feet. Cut to a shot from behind Azula. Her reflection in the mirror shows her grinning insanely, her hair a mess, but her grin disappears as the camera pans left to show Ursa in the reflection behind Azula.)

Ursa: (off screen) What a shame, you always had such beautiful hair.
Azula: What are you doing here?
Ursa: I didn't want to miss my own daughter's coronation.
Azula: Don't pretend to act proud. I know what you really think of me. You think I'm a monster.
Ursa: I think you're confused. All your life you used fear to control people. Like your friends Mai and Ty Lee.
Azula: But what choice do I have?! Trust is for fools. Fear is the only reliable way. Even you fear me.
Ursa: No. I love you, Azula. I do.

(Cut to a close up of Azula's lip quivering. She lowers her head, tears dripping from her eyes. Cut to a close up of her hand clutching a brush on the table. She suddenly turns around and angrily throws the brush at the reflection of Ursa, shattering the mirror. Cut to an overhead shot of the room. Azula is alone. She falls to her knees and starts to sob.

The scene cuts to a shot of the ground. The camera tilts up to the ocean, then to the approaching Fire Nation fleet of airships. Cut to a shot of Ozai from behind, still standing at the front of his airship. Cut to a shot of Ozai from the front and zoom in as he inhales deeply. He exhales, opens his eyes, and smiles. Cut to a shot of Ozai's airship from above. The other airship's can be seen behind it, and the airship that Sokka, Suki, and Toph took can be seen just beneath it. Cut to a shot of Ozai's airship from Sokka's point of view as he looks through a spyglass.)

Sokka: We're not going to catch up to him in time.
Suki: (sadly) No...

(Cut to a shot of Ozai from above and zoom in as he spreads his arms outward and tilts his head back. The scene fades to a shot of the comet before fading back to a close up of Ozai. He tilts his head back down and smiles sadistically. Ozai raises his arms in the air, then thrusts his palm down towards the ground beneath. A small but incredibly intense flame ignites in front of his hand, growing steadily larger until it finally erupts into an enormous fire blast that ignites the earth below. The camera zooms in on Ozai's face as he swathes the earth in fire. Cut to a shot from behind Ozai. The camera tilts up, past his great stream of fire, towards to horizon. Cut to a shot from behind a tall, stone pillar and tilt up to Aang standing on top of it, facing Ozai's assault. Cut to a closer shot of Aang from behind, and then rotate around to his front. Momo is seated on his shoulder and chirps.)

Aang: Momo, time for you to go.

(Momo leaps off of Aang's shoulder. Aang closes his eyes and breathes deeply. Aang proceeds to perform several spinning kicks, using earthbending to send giant sections of the stone pillar beneath him towards Ozai's ship. The chunks of rock whistle past the side of Ozai's airship, which catches his notice. The last few pieces of rock strike the airship's engine, which causes Ozai to lose balance and cease his attack. Cut to a shot from the side of the airship as smoke drifts from the engine. It loses power and begins to descend. Ozai looks down to see Aang. Aang spins his body around, gathering his energy, and unleashes a huge fire blast at Ozai's ship, striking the finishing blow to its engine.

Aang turns to the side towards the airship and it floats past him, facing Ozai for the first time. Cut to a close up of Ozai, staring at Aang with surprise. Cut to a shot from behind Ozai. Aang can be seen standing on top of a stone pillar in the distance. Cut to a close up of Aang facing Ozai as he lowers his bending stance. Cut to a shot of Ozai and zoom out as Ozai removes his Phoenix King armour and cloak, burning it and leaving his chest bare. Ozai leaps off of the platform he is standing on, using his firebending to fly like a rocket towards Aang. Cut to a wide shot from behind Aang of Ozai's airship crashing into the field of giant stone pillars, and Ozai flying towards Aang. Cut to a shot of Aang, the zoom out until the top of another stone pillar comes into view, which Ozai lands on. Cut to a shot Ozai as the camera tilts up from his feet towards his face, his airship smouldering behind him.

Cut to a shot of the burning airship from Sokka's point of view through a spyglass. Cut to a shot of Suki, Sokka, and Toph inside the airship cabin.)

Suki: What just happened?
Sokka: (excited) It's Aang! He's back!

(Cut to a shot of Aang and zoom in. Cut to commercial.)



Act III

(The show returns to a shot of the stone pillars. The camera rises up to the top, where Aang and Ozai are facing each other. Cut to a close up of Aang.)

Ozai: (off screen) After generations of Fire Lords failed to find you, now the Universe delivers you to me as an act of providence.
Aang: Please listen to me. We don't have to fight. You have the power to end it here and stop what you're doing.
Ozai: You are right. I do have the power. I have all the power in the World!

(At the end of Ozai's last line, torrents of fire erupt from Ozai's mouth and hands and the camera zooms out. Cut to a shot of Aang as he enters his battle stance. Cut to a shot of Ozai as the flames die down and looks to Aang. Ozai then jumps, spins in the air, and slams his fist downward, creating a circular wave of flame that spreads toward Aang. Aang jumps over the attack and them slams his hands and feet into the stone pillar below him. He earthbends a piece of the pillar he is holding on to into the air. Aang rotates it around and then kicks the chunk of rock at Ozai, who leaps away using his firebending. In mid air, Ozai propels himself at Aang using a jet of fire underneath his foot. At the same time, Aang jumps towards Ozai, performing a spinning kick and sending a wave of fire at him. Ozai then kicks forward and shoots a fireblast from his foot. The two attacks collide in a fiery explosion. The camera pulls back through the broken window of the airship cabin Sokka, Suki, and Toph are in.)

Sokka: Go, Aang! Airbending slice! (swings his hand down)
Suki: Shouldn't we be helping him?
Sokka: The Fire Lord is Aang's fight. We need to stay focused on stopping that fleet from burning down the Earth Kingdom.
Toph: And how do we do that, Captain Boomerang? I can't see outside of this floating hunk of metal.
Sokka: (smiles as he comes up with an idea and turns around) Airship slice!

(Cut to a shot of Toph and Suki as Suki raises her eyebrow at Sokka. Cut to a shot of the airship they are piloting ascending. Cut to a shot of Sokka at the wheel as he pulls some levers at the helm. Cut to a shot of the airship from outside. It continues to gain altitude. Cut to a shot of Sokka as he spins the wheel to his left. Cut back to the shot of the airship outside as it banks left towards the left end of the airship fleet behind it. Cut to a shot of the airship turning left.

Cut to a shot from the side of the airship fleet of firebenders standing on platforms jutting out towards the front. In unison, they thrust their palms towards the ground and unleash comet powered torrents of flame downward. Cut to a shot from below as the fire blasts hit the earth. Cut to a shot high above the airships. The fire burns the ground below, creating an immense amount of smoke. Cut to a shot of the forest as it is engulfed in flames in an instant. Cut to a shot of the torrents of flame from the side, and then cut to a shot from behind Toph, looking down at the chaos through the cabin's shattered window.)

Toph: Whoa. That's a lot of fire, isn't it?

(Cut to a close up of Toph's face, then cut to a shot of the airship as it fly towards the camera. Cut to a shot of inside the cabin, Sokka at the wheel. He spins it back around as their airship comes to face the side of the airship fleet. He pulls more levers, steadying the ship. Cut to a close up of Sokka pulling a lever down. Cut to a close up of a dial, its needle turning to the maximum. Cut to a shot of the exhaust pipes of the airship as fiery smoke begins to billow out. Cut to a shot of the airship's engine from outside as it begins to rupture and explode. Cut to a close up of Sokka, gritting his teeth in determination.)

Sokka: It's going to be a rough ride. We need to get to the top of this thing, fast.

(Sokka grabs Toph's hand and they run to the exit, Suki following. Sokka and Suki stop at the doorway as Toph continues on.)

Suki: Then what?
Sokka: Watch each other's backs and if we make it that far, I'll let you know.

(Sokka and Suki share a quick kiss before going on. Cut to a shot of the airship as he begins to descend and then proceeds to plough into the other airships, one after the other, causing them to crash. Cut to a shot from above as Toph, Suki, and Sokka climb their way up the ladder to the top of the airship. The floor beneath is demolished just as Sokka grabs the ladder. Cut to a shot of the top of the airship as the three of them climb out through a hatch on top. Sokka grabs Toph's hand and they all begin running to the front of the airship. The camera quickly zooms out to show the airship as it continues to fly through the fleet, slowly destroying itself in the process. Cut to a shot from the side of Sokka, Toph, and Suki. Just as they near the end, part of the front of the airship splits, separating Suki from Sokka and Toph. Cut to a shot of Suki as she reaches out to the others and falls away from the camera. Cut to a shot of Sokka and Toph as their piece of the airship pulls away.)

Sokka: Suki!

(Cut to a shot of the airship from above. The nose of the airship breaks away from the rest of it as it rams into one last enemy airship. Cut to a shot from behind Sokka, reaching out to Suki in front of him. Suki jumps off the crumbling airship and onto another one.)

Suki: I'm okay! Just finish the mission!
Sokka: No...
Toph: Sokka, I think we've gotta...
Sokka & Toph: Jump!

(Cut to a shot of the nose of the airship slamming into the side of an enemy airship. Cut to a shot from below as Sokka and Toph fall downwards. They land on the airship below, stumbling forward. Sokka quickly covers Toph with his body to shield her from the falling debris.

The scene cuts to the ceremonial plaza at the palace where the Fire Lord is coroneted, ducts of waters streaming on both sides of the area. Cut to a shot from the front of Azula kneeling at the top of the plaza steps, wearing the Fire Lord robes and with her armour underneath. Behind her are several fire sages. The leader of the sages holds the Fire Lord diadem above Azula's head.)

Fire Sage: By decree of Phoenix King Ozai, I now crown you Fire Lord...

(The sage pauses as he looks up. Azula turns her head to him.)

Azula: What are you waiting for? Do it!

(Appa is heard growling from off screen and Azula turns her head back around. Cut to a shot of Appa descending and landing in plaza's courtyard. Cut to a shot of Appa from the front. Katara is seated in Appa's saddle and Zuko stands on Appa's back.)

Zuko: Sorry, but you're not going to become Fire Lord today. (jumps off Appa) I am.
Azula: (laughs) You're hilarious.
Katara: (standing beside Zuko) And you're going down.

(The fire sage motions to crown Azula, but she raises her hand, signalling him to stop.)

Azula: Wait. You want to be Fire Lord Fine. Let's settle this. Just you and me, brother. The showdown that was always meant to be. Agni Kai!
Zuko: You're on.

(Katara turns to Zuko, surprised. Cut to a close up of Azula's lips as the curls into a smile. Cut back to Katara and Zuko.)

Katara: What are you doing? She's playing you. She knows she can't take us both so she is trying to separate us.
Zuko: I know. But I can take her this time.
Katara: But even you admitted to your Uncle that you would need help facing Azula.
Zuko: There's something off about her, I can't explain it but she's slipping. And this way, no one else has to get hurt.

(Fade to a shot of the courtyard from the side. The camera pans from Zuko kneeling on the right end to Azula kneeling on the left end. Cut to a shot of Zuko rising and turning around, then cut to a shot of Azula rising. Each can be seen behind the other. Cut to a shot of Azula from the front turning and removing the Fire Lord robes.)

Azula: I'm sorry it has to end this way, brother.
Zuko: (in his stance) No, you're not.

(Azula smiles and assumes a more awkward stance. She then spins and thrusts her palm out, shooting a blast of blue flame at Zuko. Zuko brings his hands up, jumps forward, and brings his arms down in front of him, bending two waves of flame in each hand that come together and shoot forward. Cut to a wide shot from the side as the blue and orange flames collide into a wall of fire. As the flames dissipate, Azula leaps forward on a jet of fire and kicks forward, shooting a blast of fire. She performs three spinning kicks, sending out a wave of fire towards the camera each time.

The scene cuts to an overhead shot of the field of stone pillars. Aang lands on top of one, then leaps away just before blocking and being pushed back by a blast of fire from Ozai. He follows up his attack with a stream of fire from a downward kick. Aang lands on a rock and deflects the attack. Aang lifts a small boulder from the rock and kicks it at Ozai. Ozai dodges the attack and counters by shooting a blast of fire with a kick. Aang leaps to the top of another rock to avoid the fire, and then leaps to the side of a nearby waterfall. Ozai lands on the rock Aang had leaped to and kicks another fire blast at Aang. Aang uses his water bending to re-direct the waterfall at Ozai, extinguishing the fire blast and causing Ozai to jump away. Ozai flies toward Aang and shoots a wide burst of flame at him, but Aang jumps away to the top of the waterfall. Ozai rockets up after Aang, flips forward, and shoots a fire blast from both feet. Aang jumps down the other side of the rocky slope to evade the flames.

As Ozai flies over, Aang lands on a boulder and lifts it into the air as he jumps away again, stopping Ozai for just a moment before he continues to chase after Aang and shoot a stream of fire at him from his fist. Aang spins his body around, creating a small tornado around himself that deflects the fire, and then lands on the side of a rock pillar. Aang slides around to the other side of it as Ozai lands on a rock and shoots another stream of fire. Aang leaps from the side of the pillar to the side of another. He uses his airbending to boost himself back at the first pillar and kicks the entire top half of the stone pillar at Ozai. However, Ozai flies around to the other side and shoots a concentrated ball of fire, catching Aang by surprise.

Aang raises his hand and blocks the attack, the fire flowing past his body. He is pushed back and hits the side of one of the rocks, grunting in pain and falling down to a ledge. Ozai flies at Aang and lands nearby on the same ledge. Aang picks himself up and flattens his back and arms against the rock before pulling away from it and using earthbending to create stone armour around his body. Ozai thrusts both fists at Aang and shoots a strong stream of flame, walking toward Aang and pushes him around the ledge with the attack. Ozai stops and swings his arm at Aang to hit him with a fire blast, but Aang leaps away, shedding the stone armour.

Aang flips backwards in mid air and shoots a blast of wind at Ozai. Ozai jumps to the side to avoid it, and in mid air begins to charge lightning. As he lands on top of a rock, Ozai shoots the lighting at Aang. Aang, clinging to the side of a rock, looks on with fear, but before the lightning hits, he swings his arm around to the side, creating a tornado around his body. He evades the lightning and flies around to the top of the rock. Ozai fires another lightning bolt at Aang, but misses. Ozai chases after Aang and continues to shoot lightning. Aang lifts the top of a rock into the air to shield him then dodges the next bolt. Aang jumps to a rock and rolls forward just as Ozai fires one more lightning bolt at Aang.

With not time to dodge, Aang lifts his finger to the lightning and absorbs it, grimacing in pain. Aang lets the lightning flow through his body and to his other hand. He points at Ozai, who stares back with fear. However, Aang hesitates, and instead of re-directing the lightning at Ozai, he points into the sky and lets the lightning shoot out harmlessly. Aang falls to the ground, exhausted from the strain. Ozai smiles, spins around, and kicks a blast of fire at Aang. Aang quickly raises a stone wall in front of his to block the attack, but the fire blasts through. Aang is blown off the rock and plummets down to the shallow water below. The camera zooms in on his eye as he opens it and realizes what is happening.

Aang tilts himself upright and frantically waves his arms upward. Just as he is about to hit the water, Aang manages to bend the water up so that it catches him and softens the impact. A large wave is created as the water falls down, and Aang is carried with it. Aang stands up and looks upward, and the camera tilts up to show Ozai flying down at him. Cut to a close up of Ozai rocketing forward.

The scene cuts to an overhead shot of the Fire Nation capital within the crater. Enormous blue and orange flames can be seen being flung in the right side of the city. All that can be heard is sombre music and the sound of blasts of fire. Cut to a sot from within the capital. One building is on fire. As a blue fire blast shoots past the camera, another catches on fire. Cut to a shot of Zuko as he punches forwards, releasing a powerful stream of fire. It collides with a stream of blue fire from Azula, and both attacks push against each other for a moment before slipping to one side. Cut to a shot from Zuko's side as he continues his blast of fire while keeping enormous blue flames on his other side at bay, slowly sliding backward. Cut to a close up of his foot as he slides back. Zuko pivots his foot so as to strengthen his stance and keep himself steady. Cut to a shot of Zuko from the front, fire streaming from the end of his fist.

Both Azula and Zuko stop their attacks. Azula looks back at the plaza behind her, which has caught on fire from Zuko's attack. She turns back to Zuko. Angry and scared, she charges forward and leaps upward on a blast of fire, which she swings down at Zuko. Just before the attack hits, Zuko spins his body in a circle and thrusts his palms out to the sides, creating a wall of flame that splits the blue fire in half.

Cut to an overhead shot of the flames dying down, and then cut to a panning left shot from behind Azula, crouching on the ground. Cut to a profile shot of Azula, scared and panting heavily. She grits her teeth and narrows her eyes in determination. Cut to a close up of Zuko's left fist. The camera pulls back and rotates around to Zuko's left as he opens his fist. Zuko punches forward with his other fist, and two immense fireballs are launched at Azula, spiralling and intertwining to create one massive fireball. Cut to a close up of Azula's eyes, wide with fear and tinted orange from the approaching blast. The camera quickly zooms out as Azula dodges to the right on a jet of blue fire, just narrowly avoiding the fireball.

Azula thrusts herself forward while in the air, rocketing over the ground on jets of fire from her hands and feet. Cut to a shot of Azula from the side as she punches forward twice, launching two huge blue fire blasts. Zuko places his hands near the ground and shoots a blast of fire, thrusting himself into the air and avoiding one of Azula's attacks. Zuko spins around in mid air and swings his heel downward, which creates an arc of flame that blocks the second fire blast. As Zuko falls back down, he swings his arms down, creating a blast of fire that destroys a third blue blast of fire.

Cut to a shot of Zuko crouching, his arms extended forward and blue and orange flames surrounding him. Cut to a shot of Azula flying forward over the ground. She banks to the right, avoiding Zuko's last fire blast. Cut to an overhead shot as Azula shoots a blast of fire at Zuko and begins to circle him, followed behind by an enormous trail of blue fire left from the streams of fire propelling her. Zuko defends himself by creating a large sphere of fire around him. He then tries to attack Azula with blasts of fire as she circles him, but she is too fast. Cut to a closer shot of Zuko. He stops shooting fire blasts at Azula, crouches on the ground, and performs several spinning sweep kicks, creating a powerful ring of fire that expands outward. Cut to a shot of Azula flying forward. She tries to stop herself and attempts to block Zuko's attack with a shield of blue fire, but she is too late and it connects.

Azula falls forward and rolls across the ground due to her own momentum, gasping in pain. Azula picks herself up, breathing heavily. Cut to a close up of Azula, hunched over. Her hair has come undone, and she stares at the camera with anger and contempt, baring her teeth.)

Zuko: No lightning, today? What's the matter? Afraid I'll re-direct it?

(Zuko enters a stance and thrusts his palm forward to emphasize his words. Katara runs on screen some distance behind him.)

Azula: Oh, I'LL SHOW YOU LIGHTNING!

(Azula proceeds to wave her fingertips around in arcs to generate the lightning, but her motions are far more dramatic and irregular than usual. Cut to a shot of Zuko from the front. He breathes in and out deeply as enters his stance and extends his palms out to receive the lightning. At the same time, the camera pans to the side to show Katara standing behind Zuko. The scenery flickers as Azula's lightning charges. Cut to Azula as she finishes her motions and poises herself. Cut to a close up of Azula's eyes as he glances to her left. Cut to the shot of Zuko and Katara. The camera zooms in and focuses on Katara. Cut back to Azula, still poised to strike. She smirks briefly and then extends her arm and finger tip to the left of Zuko, releasing the lighting at Katara.

The frame rate slows to a crawl as the lightning shoots from Azula's finger. Cut to a close up of Zuko. An expression of shock spreads over his face as he turns to his right. Cut to a shot of Zuko's legs as he runs to the right, trying to get in between Katara and the lightning as it shoots from Azula in the background. Cut to a close up of Katara's face and zoom in on her eyes as they reflect the approaching lightning. Cut to a shot from in front of Katara as Zuko leaps between her and the lightning.)

Zuko: (slow motion) No!

(Zuko extends his finger out and absorbs the lightning mid leap. There is a blinding flash of light before cutting to a from behind Katara as the camera pans left to show Zuko in mid air, absorbing the lightning coming from Azula, electricity surrounding the area. Cut to Katara's front and zooms in on her as she watches with shock. The frame rate speeds back up to normal when we cut to a shot of Zuko hitting the ground, letting the lightning escape from his other arm. Cut to a shot of the top of the crater that holds the Fire Nation capital. The enormous bolt of redirected lightning erupts into the sky above, lighting up the entire crater. Cut to an overhead shot of Zuko lying on the ground, twitching as electricity surges through his body. He groans as he rolls onto his back, holding his chest. Cut to Katara, frightened, as she begins to run towards Zuko.)

Katara: Zuko!

(Cut to a close up of a grimacing Zuko from the side. The clothing around his chest has been burned away by the lightning, and a scar has been left on his skin. Katara can be seen running toward Zuko, but she is stopped by another lightning bolt that strikes the ground between them. Cut to a shot of Azula, hunched over and swaying from side to side. She begins to laugh maniacally, and then she rushes at the camera just before the scene cuts to a shot of Ozai flying downward.

Cut to a shot from the side as Ozai straightens the angle of his flight and rockets over the water below, leaving behind a wake. Cut to a shot of Aang looking scared. He turns away and begins swinging his arms in circles as he uses waterbending to propel himself over the water and towards the shore. Cut to an overhead shot of Aang reaching the shore. Cut to a shot of Aang stumbling forward and falling, with Ozai closing in behind him. Just as Ozai reaches Aang, Aang swings his arms around and earthbends a small, thick sphere of rocks around himself. Ozai hovers just over Aang. He laughs as we cut to a shot of Aang within the cramped space, frightened and bracing himself.)

Ozai: You're weak! Just like the rest of your people. They did not deserve to exist in this world, in my world. Prepare to join them. Prepare to die!

(The camera tilts up and shifts to the exterior of the rock ball as Ozai approaches it. He lifts both arms up and leans back before smashing both fists into the ball, releasing a powerful blast of fire on impact. Cut to Aang inside the rock ball. He closes his eyes as small pebbles fall around him and the stone cocoon shakes, trying to keep it intact. Orange light can be seen between the individual rocks. The camera cuts to an overhead shot of Ozai and the rock ball as the fire of his attack blasts downward and then rises up in a bright orange cloud. Ozai jumps several feet back. Cut to a shot from behind as Ozai lands. Cut to a close up of Ozai rising up to the camera's level. The camera quickly zooms out as Ozai charges forward and thrusts both fists at the camera, releasing a blast of fire just before the screen goes black.)



[End Credits]
Act I

(Episode opens to a barren land. Camera pans to the right to some small bodies of water near the stone pillars. The barren land was once an ocean but has been dried up after Ozai's attack. Cut to an overhead view of Aang's rockball as Ozai sends curved fire blasts towards it with his right and then left hand. He sends a straight fire blast towards the ball. Cut to Aang perspiring inside the ball as he struggles to hold it together. Tiny rock pieces fall on impact with Ozai's blasts.)

Ozai: (off screen) Come on out (Aang cringes as the rock ball shakes and trembles.) Avatar, you can't (Cut to Ozai who is sending a strong, continuous stream of fire towards the rockball) hide in there forever!

(Cut back to the airships in the air as a lone firebender continues to send torrents of flame towards the ground. Some airships Sokka sabotaged earlier are smoking and steadily descending. Camera slowly zooms in on an intact airship. Cut to Sokka running. Camera pans to the right slowly to show him grabbing Toph's hand as she runs with all her might behind him. Cut to an overhead shot of the ship's roof, material from the ship's envelope fly around them in tiny red pieces.)

Sokka: Toph, metalbend the rudder so it's jammed in the turning position. The ship will spiral and slam into the others.
Toph: Got it.

(She places her hands on Sokka's shoulders to move him out of the way. She proceeds to spit in both hands and lets out a battle cry as she slams her hands on the rudder, pulling the metal sheets back steadily. Cut to an overhead shot of the ship to show the rudder slowly turning into a perpendicular position. Cut to inside the cabin as the elite firebenders are thrown against the walls of the cabin since the airship changes course. Cut to an overhead shot of 2 airships as one of them slowly turns and hits the neighbouring ship. Cut to a frontal shot of the airships to show the airship Toph and Sokka are on tearing through the neighbouring airship as the roof of the airship passes by the camera. Cut to Sokka and Toph who are balancing themselves from the impact.)

Sokka: (surprised and joyful) Have I ever mentioned how sweet it is that you invented metalbending?
Toph: You could stand to mention it more.

(Cut to a bottom shot of another airship shooting flames towards the ground. The flames dissipate as the sabotaged airship slams into it. Cut to the roof of the airship as a trapdoor opens to reveal an elite firebender. Camera zooms out to show Toph and Sokka who notice the intrusion. Sokka grabs Toph's arms as they run off screen, narrowly missing a strong fire blast. Cut to an overhead shot of the scene to show the long and unwavering blast changing angles as Toph and Sokka struggle to get out of the path of fire.

Cut to an area just below the airship's envelope as Toph and Sokka jump off. Sokka unsheathes his sword as he does so. Cut to the sword digging into the airship's envelope and sparking due to friction. Cut to a sideview shot of the scene to show that the sword is slowing their descent somewhat. Cut to an overhead shot of Sokka as he looks at his sword with fear and Toph screams. Cut to a close up of Sokka as he looks down. Cut to a sideview shot of the scene to show them nearing the end of the envelope.

The sword doesn't make contact with the envelope and both of them are thrown off the ship's surface. Sokka loses his hold on the sword. Cut to the bottom of a wrench-shaped platform as Sokka lands on the extension beam with a loud groan while Toph falls through the U-shaped portion of the platform. Sokka is still holding on to her. Cut to their hands as Toph slowly slips down. Cut to an overhead shot of Sokka with his left leg bent at an awkward angle. His sword is punctured vertically into the balance beam near his legs.)

Sokka: (grimaces) My leg! (He looks through the U-shaped opening) Hang on Toph!
Toph: Aye aye, Captain.

(Pan out to a neighboring platform as an elite firebender attached to a safety harness enters the screen. Cut to Sokka who turns his head to find another firebender taking position on the other side. Cut to a close up shot of a perspiring Sokka as his head shifts from the right to the left. Cut to the firebender getting into a stance. Cut to Sokka's boomerang holder as his hand reaches into it.

Cut to a frontal shot of the firebender and time slows down as he starts to firebend. Time resumes back to normal as Sokka unsheathes his boomerang. Cut to the firebender on the right of Sokka as he falls when Sokka strikes him with his boomerang. Cut to Sokka's point of view as he uses his uninjured leg to kick up the hilt of his sword. Cut to an overhead shot of Sokka as he grabs the sword. Cut to a side shot above Sokka's torso as he hurtles his sword and cuts the platform the remaining firebender is standing on. The harness prevents him from falling to his death. Sokka looks down. Cut to a space beneath the airship as Sokka's sword falls away.)

Sokka: Bye Space Sword.

(Cut to the corridor leading to the platform they're on as a group of firebenders run in and position themselves into a stance. Cut to Sokka and Toph's hands as Toph's hand slips out of grip and Sokka grabs on to her fingers with his digits at the last moment. Cut to a frontal shot of the firebenders as the camera pans across them. Cut to an overhead shot of Sokka struggling to hold on to Toph.)

Sokka:I don't think Boomerang is coming back, Toph. (Toph tears up) It looks like this is the end.

(Cut back to the corridor as the firebenders suddenly run off. Sokka looks behind him. Cut to another airship heading towards them at high speed. Cut to an under shot of the scene as the other airship slams into the sabotaged airship and scrapes through the bottom. Cut to an undershot of the other ship's envelope looking up at Sokka and Toph as he lets go off Toph. Cut to an overhead view of the other ship's roof as Toph and Sokka land on it with some debris. Sokka winces from the pain as he lands on his injured leg. Cut to a close up side shot of Sokka as he falls down, grabbing his leg in agony.)

Toph: How did that happen? Did Boomerang come back?
Sokka: (looking up and smiling) No, (Cut to show smiling Suki hanging from a harness near the rudder of the airship) Suki did.

(Cut to an overhead shot of Aang's rockball as Ozai sends a curved fireball with his left hand, a straight blast and then 2 curved blasts towards the ball with both hands. The impact lifts the rock ball off the ground. Cut to a side shot of the ball as another fire blast hits the ball, sending it back. Ozai flies up with his firebending rocket and heads towards the ball, firebending along the way. He lands and sends a torrent of flames at the ball. Cut to a side shot of the scene to show the intensity of the fire. The flames are several feet tall.

Cut to Aang cringing inside the ball. Cut to Ozai who smiles evilly. Cut back to Aang in the ball as the interior glows and darkens rapidly. Cut to the surface of the ball as it glows red hot from the flames. Camera zooms out to show Ozai jumping backwards and raising his arm up. Cut to the palm of his hand as a small ball of fire ignites in his palm. Camera follows Ozai as he runs, jumps and throws the fire at the ball. Cut back to Aang as the rocks fall apart. Cut back to outside the ball to show various parts of it crumbling away, revealing Aang who has a small shield of air around him.

Cut to Aang who is moved back by the impact and time slows down. Cut to Aang's scar on his back as it makes contact with a jutted edge of a rock wall behind him. As he lands against it, time resumes back to normal and the background flashes to white and Aang's body is in black. Cut to Aang being shot with lightning in Crossroads of Destiny. Cut to Aang looking at the past Avatars in The Avatar State as the line of Avatars come back. Cut to Avatar Kyoshi opening her glowing eyes. Camera quickly pans across a few previous Avatars as they open their glowing eyes. Cut to Avatar Roku opening his eyes in Avatar and the Fire Lord. Cut back to the line again as the camera rapidly pans across them. Cut to Aang inside his crystal shelter in Crossroads of Destiny as he opens his eyes. Cut back to the line again. Cut to Aang opening his eyes underwater in The Storm. Cut to the Avatar Spirit in Aang's mind. Its arrows glow with bright intensity and the camera zooms in on it. Fade back to an overhead shot of Ozai walking towards a pile of steaming rocks.)

Ozai: Come on out little boy, (Cut to a close up side shot of Ozai as he bends forward to the pile) you're about to be...

(A glowing arm sticks out from the pile and grabs Ozai's beard to his astonishment. Cut to an overhead shot of the pile. Cut to a close up of Aang's head under the pile as he looks up menacingly with glowing eyes and tattoos. Cut to a side shot of the scene as Aang jumps out and stares hard at Ozai. The Phoenix King firebends his arm in an arc toward Aang. Cut to an area behind Aang's head as time slows down. Aang releases his hold on Ozai's beard and swipes Ozai's arm. Cut to a far side shot of the scene to show a large burst of flame being directed to the air.

Cut to an area behind Ozai's back as he looks up at his arm in dismay. Aang makes several gestures around his head and thrusts his palms out. Cut to a side shot of the scene as Aang airbends. Cut to an area behind Aang's back to show Ozai being thrown back violently by the air. Camera follows Ozai rolling and colliding against the ground like a rag doll. His back collides against a stone pillar and he grimaces in pain. Cut to a frontal shot of Ozai as lands in a crouch behind a mist of smoke. Cut to an area behind Ozai as the smoke clears. He looks up and camera pans up to show Aang descending onto Ozai with a sphere of air circling around him.

Cut to a close up of Aang's face as he firebends with a roar through his mouth. Camera pans out to show him firebending out of his limbs as well, looking like a star. The sphere moves up towards the sky. Cut to a side shot of the scene near the shore as the 5 streams of fire loop about. Cut to Ozai who moans and struggles against the stinging air pressure. Cut to an area behind Ozai's back as the pillars crumble from the wind.

Cut back to the shore as the fire streams circle and tighten around the ball. At the same time, pieces of earth from the ground beneath Aang and remaining water from the ocean floor slowly make their way towards the sphere. Cut to an undershot of the sphere as the fire streams gather and form a revolving ring near the centre outside of the sphere. The pieces of earth fly up into screen. Cut to Aang's clenched fist as he tightens them. Cut back to the pieces of earth as they're bent into a smaller size and they fly towards the sphere. Cut to a side shot of the shore to show a wide circle of air revolving below Aang and water slowly bent above the air circle.

Cut to Aang's back view as he bends the earth into a North-West position around him, inside the sphere. The water gets bent into a North-East position inside the sphere as well. The various elements continue to orbit around him as he does so. Cut back to Ozai looking from behind his arms as his eyes widen in shock. Cut to a frontal shot of an angry Aang. Camera slowly zooms out to show his lethal sphere of elements.

Cut back to an empty courtyard in Ba Sing Se. 2 columns of fire are seen shooting upwards from behind some houses. Camera pans to the right and the ground shakes and a sinkhole forms. Bumi jumps out from the hole. He looks around and makes a "Whoa" noise. Cut to 5 Fire Nation tanks that roll in and one starts to firebend from the opening. Cut back to Bumi who raises a protective wall of earth. The wall comes down and camera zooms out slightly. Bumi earthbends several chunks of earth from the ground and kicks them towards the tanks. Cut to an opening of a tank as it opens to firebend at Bumi but gets quickly cut off by a chunk of rock that slams against the opening.

Cut to an overhead shot of the tanks as the neighbouring tank starts to firebend but suffers the same fate. Cut to Bumi who turns and makes several earthbending movements with his arms and he raises his arms up. Cut to a column of earth rising from beneath a tank, throwing it up. 2 more columns enter the screen as the tanks fly off screen. Cut to an overhead shot of a tank that has been turned turtle and more tanks fly into screen and they get stacked on top of each other. The base opening of the topmost tank opens to reveal a shakey Fire Nation soldier who moans with discomfort. The other soldiers also come out of the tanks, not feeling well either.

Cut to a back view of Iroh standing in front of the Earth King's palace. The Earth Kingdom symbol has been covered with a Fire Nation banner. Cut to a close up frontal shot of Iroh as a wave of water and a column of fire burst out from some houses behind him. Iroh sticks out 2 fingers and firebends at the banner. Cut to the Fire Nation banner as it catches fire. Cut back to Iroh who smiles. Cut to a back view of Iroh as the banner burns away to reveal the Earth Kingdom symbol.

Cut to an area behind Ozai's back as Aang's sphere drops down towards him. Cut to a side shot as Ozai gets hit by the sphere and gets carried by it for a short distance before Aang airbends him away. Camera pans across some stone pillars to show Ozai being thrown upwards to the air. Aang's sphere swiftly flies into screen towards Ozai. Cut to Ozai who groans in pain and looks ahead. Camera pans out to show Aang's sphere catching up to him. Ozai firebends with his feet away from the sphere. Cut to an overhead shot of the scene as Ozai's stream of fire moves away from the sphere and Aang's sphere suddenly moves up towards the camera.

Aang makes gestures with his arms. Cut to a piece of earth inside Aang's sphere as they get broken apart into small earth bullets. Cut to an area behind Aang's back as he sends the earth bullets towards the rock pillars, creating a huge plume of smoke. A small stream of fire flies away from the top of the smoke. Cut back to a close up frontal shot of a furious Aang who runs within his sphere towards the camera.

Cut to an overhead shot of the ceremonial plaza in the Fire Nation. Cut to a close up of Zuko lying on the floor with some small flames burning the ground around him. Cut to a frontal shot of Zuko's head as he struggles to get up. Cut to Katara who gasps. Switch to Katara's point of view as she runs with her arms moving about in front of her body towards Zuko. She bends a water glove around her hand as blue fire engulfs the whole screen. Cut to an area behind Katara's back as she shields herself from Azula's flames.

The fire clears to reveal Azula laughing hysterically and jumping into screen, charging up with lightning. Katara runs off quickly. Cut to a frontal shot of Zuko as he attempts to get up and stretches his arms out helplessly. Switch to Zuko's point of view as Katara runs around the perimeter of the plaza, narrowly missing Azula's lighting. Cut to a frontal shot of Katara as she somersaults away from the impact. She turns back as Azula firebends herself onto the roof. Cut to a close up of Azula as she charges up with lightning.)

Azula: I'd really rather our family physician look after (Cut to Katara looking up as she gets off the ground and turns away) little Zuzu if you don't (Cut to Azula who has made wide arcs of lightning around her) mind!

(She sends the powerful bolt of lightning out. Cut to a shot from the roof looking at the plaza as a stream of water appears to block the lightning. Cut to a close up frontal shot of Azula as she sends 2 blasts of fire with her hands. Cut to a frontal shot of Katara running and hiding behind a pillar, narrowly missing Azula's attacks again. Another fire blast hits the pillar and camera cuts to a close up of Katara who cringes with her hands over her head. She opens her eyes and stands up. The ground in front of her is slightly on fire. She peers from behind the pillar.)

Azula: (off screen) Zuzu, (Cut to an area behind Katara looking at Zuko) you don't look so good!

(Cut to a frontal shot of Katara who looks up to the roof. Cut back to Azula on the roof as she charges up with lightning and sends out a bolt. Cut to the end of the corridor as Katara runs to hide behind another pillar as the lightning makes contact with the previous pillar. Cut to a close up side shot of Katara who stares at the destroyed pillar. With a look of determination, she turns away. Cut to an area in the plaza looking at Katara as she stretches her arms out. Camera pans out to show her bending a stream of water from a nearby fountain. Cut back to Katara as she bends the water towards the roof.

Cut to a frontal shot of Katara as Azula flies in behind her. She runs off. Cut to a wide shot of the plaza as Katara runs and bends a wave of water from the same fountain. Azula continues to levitate behind her closely with her firebending jets. Cut to the water waves as Katara surfs into screen. A fire blast evaporates the water but Katara still has enough to continue surfing. Azula enters the screen and drops to the ground in a roll. Cut to a frontal shot of Azula as she firebends wildly towards Katara. Cut to a frontal shot of Katara as she surfs away in time.

Cut to an overhead shot of some drains inside the plaza as Katara stumbles into it. Cut to a close up of Katara she looks down at the drain while the wall of fire dissipates behind her. Camera pans to the flowing water inside the drain. Cut to Katara's point of view looking at the rich water source. Cut to a frontal shot of Katara she looks up. Camera quickly cuts to a metal chain looped around a handle. Cut back to Katara as she stands up.

Cut to Azula's hand grabbing a pillar. Camera pans to the left to show Katara running from behind a pillar with chains in her hands.)

Azula: There you (Cut to a frontal shot of haggard and angry Azula) are, filthy peasant!

(Cut to the end of the drain looking at Azula walking towards a stationary Katara. Cut to a close up side shot of Katara as she narrows her eyes with determination. Cut to Azula's eyes as she narrows them with hate. Cut to a frontal shot of Katara as she sends streams of water towards Azula. Cut to Azula who dodges them and rolls across the drain. Cut back to the end of the drain as Katara walks closer to Azula while Azula attempts to stand up. Cut to a frontal shot of Azula as she thrusts her fingers out. Switch to Azula's point of view as Katara moves backwards.

Cut to a side view shot of the scene as Katara bends water from the drain, freezing their movements. Camera zooms out slowly. Cut to a close up of a surprised Azula as her eyes dart around but she is unable to move. Cut to a close up of Katara with Azula's fingers inches away from her face. Katara exhales and the ice around her body melt into water as she proceeds to chain Azula's arm. Cut to an area behind Azula as Katara floats through the water, chaining Azula's remaining arm. Cut to close up shot of an angry Azula as her head is brought down. Cut to a frontal shot of the scene to show Katara bringing Azula to her knees as she floats behind her. Cut to Katara's hands as she wraps the chains around the drain gratings. Cut to an overhead shot of the 2 girls as Katara waterbends the water back to the drain.

Camera zooms out as the water flows away and both of them cough and gasp for air. Katara grabs the chains. Cut to the chains as Katara tightens them. Cut to an annoyed Azula. Camera zooms out as Katara tightens them for one last time before running off screen. Cut to Zuko who moans with pain. Katara's boot comes into screen and she kneels at Zuko's side. She turns him over so the lightning wound is facing her. Parts of his robe around the wound site got burnt off. She brings up a water gloved hand. Cut to an overhead shot of the wound as she presses the water glove on the wound and it spreads out. Cut to an overhead shot of the scene as the water glows blue.

Cut to a side view shot of Zuko as he grimaces and relaxes. He opens his eyes. Cut to Katara who opens her eyes and smiles with relief as she looks at Zuko.)

Zuko:(whispering weakly) Thank you, Katara.
Katara: (Cut to Katara who tears up) I think I'm the one who should be thanking you.

(Cut to a side shot of both of them as Katara helps him sit up. Cut to an angry Azula who exhales uncontrollably rapidly and firebends out from her mouth. Cut to a frontal shot of her as she struggles and continues to firebend at the drain. Camera zooms out slowly to show Zuko and Katara looking at her as Azula lands on her back. Cut to a close up of Azula's face as she breaks down into tears. Cut to a frontal shot of Zuko and Katara as they look on. Katara is in shock and looks away. She looks up at Zuko who looks at his sister expressionlessly. Cut to an overhead shot of the drain as Azula continues to whimper and flail around.

Cut to commercial break.)



Act II

(Scene returns to the red sky and a long stream of fire enters the screen. Cut Ozai who is flying away from Aang. Switch to Ozai's point of view as he dodges the rock pillars. Cut to Aang who flies closer to the camera and brings his arms together. Cut to 2 rock pillars as they close together. Cut to Ozai who stops in front of the pillars and changes direction. Cut to an overhead shot of the pillars. Cut to Aang who circles his arms around his body. Cut back to an overhead shot of the pillars as Ozai flies nearer the camera but gets hit by a blast of water. Cut to the base of some pillars as the water flows off, revealing Ozai as he presses his back against the pillar, looking up.

Camera pans up and Aang breaks the top part of the pillar, descending towards Ozai. Cut to a top view of Ozai as he turns back and firebends. Cut to a side view shot of Ozai as he flies away with his feet and his arm extends out towards Aang, time slows down slightly. As Ozai moves off screen, time returns back to normal and Aang's sphere crashes into the ground and he brings more chunks of earth with him. Cut to Ozai who flies behind a pillar. Camera pans up to the top of the pillar as Ozai lands and firebends with his feet. Cut to Aang who brings his arms together. Cut to an overhead shot of the scene to show that Aang brought another 2 pillars together to block Ozai's attack. Cut to Aang's back as he proceeds to earthbend the pillars into an ‘X' shape.

Cut to a side view shot of the scene as Ozai flies off. Cut to a close up of Aang as he turns in his sphere and stops in a stance with his arms up. Camera zooms out to reveal 5 streams of fire coming out from the revolving circle of fire. Cut to a wide side shot of the pillars as the 5 streams of fire chase a flying Ozai who dodges them. Ozai stops in front of the camera and realizes a stream of fire coming up from behind him and he flies off. Camera pans to the left as the fire stream hits a pillar that Ozai just flew past. Aang's sphere enters the screen. Cut to a top view of Ozai as he lands perpendicular to a pillar with his feet and extends his arms out.

Cut to an overhead shot of the scene as he sends 3 streams of fire towards Aang. Cut to Aang who extends his arms out. 3 streams of water and a gust of air come out from his sphere. Cut to an undershot of Ozai's flames as the water and air intercept it. Cut to an overhead shot of the flames as the water and air circle around them. The flames dissipate. Cut to a side shot of the pillar as a strong gust of air hits Ozai and he gets flung towards the camera. Cut to the pillar as it erodes away rapidly. Aang flies by and the top part of the pillar collapses.

Cut to a side shot of Aang chasing Ozai as Aang knocks down a pillar. He gains up on Ozai and knocks down another pillar. Ozai changes direction and Aang follows, knocking another pillar again. Cut to a close up of Ozai who looks back fearfully. Cut to a plume of smoke as Aang's sphere comes through it. Cut to Ozai who gasps and desperately tries to get out of the way. Cut to Aang as he arms moves in a circular motion in front of his body. His face comes towards the camera to show him clenching his jaw with anger. He closes his fist. Cut to flames coming out of Ozai's foot as a loop of water extinguishes it and curls around his calf and creeps up to his body. Cut to Ozai's torso to show the water creeping up to his head. Ozai is visibly terrified. He gets pulled back by the water.

Cut to a full view of the sphere as Aang waterbends the loop around and throws Ozai off screen. Cut to the top of a pillar as Ozai lands on his back forcefully with the water. The water flows off. Cut an area above Ozai's head as Aang's sphere descends towards him. Cut to a close up of Aang as he extends his arms out and clenches them. Cut to Ozai's feet as mounds of earth encase them. Cut to a close up of Ozai's face as he looks at his hand being encases in earth. Camera pans out to his other hand and he looks at his remaining hand being closed up in earth. Cut to a shot at the end of Ozai's legs as Aang's sphere enters the screen. Cut to a close up overhead shot of Ozai as he looks up in fear.)

Aang: (his voice is mixed together with the previous Avatars) Fire Lord Ozai, you and your forefathers have devastated the balance of this world, and now (Ozai looks on frightened) you shall pay the ultimate price.

(Aang makes a weaving motion across his body. Camera pans to an overhead shot of the pillars as a stream of fire interlaced with water, air and rocks extend out like a snake. Cut to Aang who moves his arms in a slashing motion. Cut to the tip of elemental stream as it rapidly descends. Ozai widens his eyes in fear and he closes them. Cut to Aang's hand as his tattoos stop glowing. Cut to the elemental stream as it falls apart. Water drops onto Ozai's face and he looks up, surprised. Aang drops his arms and shakes his head as his tattoos and eyes cease glowing.

Cut to an area behind Ozai's head as Aang lowers his sphere of an air onto the ground. The mounds of earth holding Ozai's limbs together break apart as he looks on dumbfounded. He moans and struggles to sit up. Cut to a side shot of the top of the pillar as Ozai gets up into a kneeling position while Aang touches the floor.)

Aang: (Camera pans across Aang's face to show Ozai kneeling behind him) No... I'm not going to end it like this.
Ozai: Even with all the power in the World, (Cut to Ozai who looks on slyly) you are still weak.

(Ozai proceeds to move forward. Cut to a slight overhead shot of the scene as it switches to Toph's black and white earthbending sight. Shock waves move out from Ozai's hand and it travels up Aang's body towards his brain. Colour returns back to normal and camera zooms out to a side view shot of the pillar as time slows down. Aang sticks out his leg behind him and earthbends a mini rock wall that directs Ozai's hand upwards so the flames don't hit him. Cut to a close up of Aang as he runs off screen and traps Ozai's hand within the rock wall. Camera rotates to Ozai's free hand as he starts to firebend but Aang brings up his arms and traps that hand in a rocky mound as well. Camera continues to rotate as Aang steps in front of Ozai and lowers the mounds to bring Ozai to his knees. Ozai tries to firebend out of his mouth but Aang sends out a gust of air to dissipate the flames and his right hand touches Ozai's forehead while his left hand touches his chest.

Switch to Aang's point of view as Ozai appears immobilized. The lion turtle's chanting music plays. Cut to a close up of Aang as he closes his eyes and concentrates. Fade to Aang confronting the lion turtle in The Old Masters.)

Lion Turtle:In the era before the Avatar, we bend not the elements, (Cut to a sideview shot of the scene as the lion turtle raises its claw out of the water) but the energy within (Cut to a close up side view of Aang as the claw touches Aang's forehead and chest. Green light emits and Aang widens his eyes in realization) ourselves.

(Cut to the lion turtle's eye as the green light shadows it. Cut to a far side view shot of the scene to show a bright glowing light around the lion turtle's head and Aang's body. Fade back to present day Aang still deep in concentration. He lifts his head and white-blue light streams out from his eyes and mouth, Cut to a sideview shot of the scene as the light seems to stream on endlessly. Cut to Ozai's eyes as orange light streams out of there and his mouth. Camera cuts to a far side shot of the scene to show 2 streams of each colour mingled together.

Cut to a close up of the two of them as the pillar rumbles and shakes. White-blue light covers Aang's head and travels down his entire body. Orange light travels down from Ozai's head towards his entire body as well. Cut to full view of the pillar to show the intensity of the light. Half the background is completely filled with white-blue light while the other half is filled with orange light.)

Lion Turtle: (voice over) To bend another's energy, your own spirit (Cut to a close up of Ozai's orange body as the orange light covers Aang's hands and travels up to his arms) must be unbendable, or you will be corrupted (Cut to Aang's body as the orange light covers his torso and travels up his shoulders, towards his head) and destroyed.

(Cut to an overhead view of Aang's head as the orange light slowly covers his entire head. Cut to a full view of the pillar as the background is almost covered with orange light and the remaining beam of white-blue light slowly diminishes. Cut to a close up of Aang's face as one eye continues to stream white-blue light but it is rapidly fading away into orange light. Suddenly Aang throws up his head and white-blue light covers his entire head again. Cut to sideview of Aang as the white-blue light travels through his body and into Ozai's in a split second.

Cut to a full view of the pillar as the white-blue light fills up the entire screen. Cut to an overhead view of the pillars as a single beam of white-blue light shoots up towards the sky. Camera pans from the pillars to the sky as the white-blue light hits the clouds to form a circle. The beam of the white-blue light widens. Cut back to an overhead view of the pillars as the white-blue light fades away. Cut to Ozai's back as the white-blue light covers the two of them for a while before diminishing. Ozai's earth mounds fall apart and he drops to the ground. Aang staggers briefly before standing up straight. Cut to an area behind Aang looking at Ozai as he struggles to sit up and thrusts his hand out but nothing happens and he falls back to the ground.)

Ozai: (looking up feebly) What...what did you do to me?
Aang: I took away your firebending. You can't use it to hurt or threaten anyone else ever again.

(Cut to the Aang's back as he turns towards the burning forest. He raises his arms out. Cut to Ozai who turns towards Aang furiously. Cut back to Aang as he inhales and camera zooms out to show his eyes and tattoos glowing briefly. He moves his arms up towards the sky. Cut to the forest as water floods the whole area, extinguishing the fires. Cut to some flaming airships as the water extinguishes the embers. Cut to the burning trees as more water floods into screen, covering the tree from top to toe and the fire dissipates. Cut to an overhead view of the burning pillars as the last of the water floods the area, extinguishing the remaining flames. Camera pans up to the pillar Aang is standing on. Cut to an area behind Aang's back as he moves his arms and the water evaporates. Cut to a frontal shot of Aang as camera rotates slightly around him. Camera slowly zooms out to an area beneath Aang's feet. Momo flies into screen and lands on Aang's shoulder. Both of them look out at the calm forest. Cut to commercial break.)



Act III

(Scene returns to the camera looking up at the sky as the comet passes by. Camera pans down to an airship wedged on top of the rock pillars. Cut to an area behind Aang's back as he watches Suki and Toph support Sokka as they walk past the platform onto the pillar.)

Sokka: You did it! You should have seen yourself, it was amazing! (He lifts his arms from both girls shoulders and stands on one leg, lifting his bandaged leg off the ground) You were all like, (he proceeds to make several punching gestures) "pshoom, pfoom, pfoom, phish, whoom", and then the Fire Lord was all like, (he pretends to choke himself) "eugh, eh, eh, eh, eugh, aye".

(Cut to Aang's side view as Suki carefully inspects Ozai who is slumped against a rock.)

Suki: So, did you... (points at Ozai) you know...finish the job?
Ozai: (Cut to a close up of Ozai as he stirs angrily) I'm still alive.

(Suki draws herself back from the ex-Fire Lord. Cut to a slight overhead view of the pillar.)

Aang: I learned there was another way to defeat him and restore balance. I took his bending away.
Toph: (Sokka and Toph widen their eyes with surprise) Wow, who taught you that?
Aang: (matter-of-factly) A giant Lion Turtle.
Toph:(She crosses her arms and Sokka walks off screen) You have the craziest adventures when you disappear.

(Cut to an area behind Aang's leg looking at Sokka limping his way to Ozai)

Sokka: (mocking) Well, look at you buster. Now that your firebending is gone, I guess we should call you the "Loser Lord".
Ozai: (pulls himself up with the help from the rock behind him) I am the Phoenix King!

(He points his finger out warningly towards Sokka but he drops back to the floor. It is noted his eyes are slightly dilated.)

Toph: Oh sorry, didn't mean to offend you "Phoenix King of (punches her fist into her palm) Getting His Butt Whupped."
Suki: (Cut to a close up of a drooling Ozai with Suki, Sokka and Toph still visible in the background) Yeah, or how about "King of the Guys Who... Don't Win"
Toph: (Ozai simply blinks, closes and opens his mouth. It seems he has temporarily lost control of his body) Leave the nicknames to us (points to herself) honey.

(Cut to a shot above the pillars looking at sky as the comet slowly flies off into the horizon. The comet leaves Earth and the red sky fades to night.

Cut to an overhead shot of the crater in the Fire Nation capital the next day. Camera pans across the roofs of some houses singed and destroyed during Zuko and Azula's Agni Kai. Cut to Zuko in his room standing near the windows as the morning sunlight streams in. He puts on his outer robe. Cut to a close of Zuko with a bandaged torso as he moans and struggles to put his arm through the robe's sleeve.)

Mai:(off screen) You need some help with that?

(He looks up surprised and moves aside to reveal Mai leaning against the doorway. Cut to a close up of Mai as she walks towards Zuko.)

Zuko: (Cut to a delighted Zuko) Mai! (Walks off screen) You're ok. (Cut to an area behind Mai's back as Zuko opens his arms out in a hug) They let you out of prison?

(Mai walks behind Zuko and lifts up his empty robe sleeve.)

Mai: My uncle (Zuko puts his arms through the sleeve) pulled some strings, (she proceeds to fasten his robe) and it doesn't hurt when the new Fire Lord is your boyfriend. (She walks in front of Zuko and places a hand on his chest)
Zuko: So does this mean you don't hate me anymore?
Mai: (she blushes) I think it means... (Cut to a close up of the couple) I actually (places a hand on Zuko's cheek) kind of like you. (They lean in for a kiss and part a fewseconds later, looking into each other's eyes happily) But don't ever (She jabs a finger into Zuko's shoulder and Zuko's eye traces the movement of her finger) break up (She lifts her finger into the air and Zuko's eyes still follows it) with me again.

(She jabs her finger into Zuko's shoulder one last time and Zuko smiles goofily. They embrace and the camera zooms out slowly.

Cut to an overhead shot of the coronation plaza. A crowd has gathered in front of the coronation platform. Cut to The Duke embracing Toph with Pipsqueak, Hippo and The Boulder looking on. Camera pans to the left to show Haru with his father. Camera pans some more to show the swamp benders. They part as the Water Tribe siblings walk past them and look around the crowd. Sokka is using a crutch to support his injured leg. They walk closer to the camera.)

Sokka:Dad!
Katara: Dad!

(Cut to Hakoda talking to Bato as he turns his head towards his children's voices. Cut to a side shot of the scene as the siblings hug their father.)

Hakoda: I heard what you two did. (Cut to a close up Hakoda) I am the proudest father in the world. (Sokka smiles) And your mother (Camera pans to the right as Hakoda looks at his daughter) would be proud too.

(Katara touches her necklace and tears up. Cut to a side view of the scene as a leg in Kyoshi uniform step into screen. Cut to a frontal shot of Suki back in her Kyoshi garb with 2 other warriors flanked behind her.)

Sokka: (off screen) There's my favorite warriors. I have to admit, (Camera zooms out to reveal 2 more warriors standing behind Suki) I kind of missed the face paint. How does it feel to be back in uniform again (Ty Lee cuts through from behind Suki)
Ty Lee: It feels great!

(Cut to Sokka who is shocked. Cut to a frontal shot of the Kyoshi warriors as he limps onto screen.)

Sokka: (He stands in front of Suki protectively while pointing his crutch towards Ty Lee) Careful Suki! Ty Lee is pretending to be a Kyoshi Warrior again.
Suki: It's ok. (Sokka relaxes) She's one of us now. (Sokka points to Ty Lee speechlessly and points back to Suki)
Ty Lee: Yeah, the girls and I (Cut to a close up of Ty Lee) really bonded in prison. (She walks off screen and the camera follows her) And after a few Chi blocking lessons, they said I could join their group. (She stands in between 2 warriors and places her arms around their shoulders) We're going to be (Ty Lee pulls them closer to her as they look on expressionlessly) best friends forever.

(Ty Lee smiles widely and the 2 warriors smile albeit hesitantly. Cut to the end of a corridor inside the coronation building as Zuko in his new Fire Lord outfit walking towards Aang in orange sitting beside the door.

Cut to a close up of Aang meditating. He has worn his new monk robes and a necklace similar to Monk Gyatso's. Cut to a side shot of Aang as Zuko stops in front of the curtains and addresses him.)

Zuko: I can't believe a year ago my purpose in life was hunting you down, and now...
Aang: (Cut to a close up of a smiling Aang) And now we're friends.
Zuko: Yeah...we are friends. (Camera pans out to an area directly in front of the curtain looking at the 2 boys.)
Aang: I can't believe a year ago (stands up and faces Zuko) I was still frozen in a block of ice. The World's so different now.
Zuko: (Zuko walks towards Aang and places a hand on his shoulder) And it's gonna be even more different, when we build it together.

(They hug and separate as Zuko parts the curtains and walks through them. Aang follows shortly after. Cut to an overhead shot of the crowd in front of the coronation platform. They have been arranged into 4 groups: Swamp benders, earth benders, Water Tribe warriors and Fire Nation citizens. Cut to the Fire Sages as one of them sounds a gong 3 times. Zuko walks into screen and they bow in respect. Cut to an area behind Zuko's back looking down at the cheering crowd. Cut to a frontal shot of Zuko as he raises his arm.)

Zuko: Please, the real hero (He moves aside to reveal Aang walking towards him) is the Avatar.

(Cut to The Duke and Toph who are sitting on Pipsqueak and Hippo's shoulders respectively as all 4 of them cheer wildly. Cut to Aang scanning the crowd. Cut to a side view of Katara, Sokka, Hakoda and Suki. Camera rotates to show a close up of Katara looking on. Sentimental music chimes in the background.)

Zuko: Today, this war is finally over. (Cut to Haru, Tyro,
Teo and The Mechanist as they smile and the Fire Nation citizens behind them cheer) I promised (Cut to a serious Zuko) my Uncle that I would restore the honor of the Fire Nation, and I will. (Camera pans across the back of the heads of the crowd) The road ahead of us is challenging. A hundred years of fighting has left the world scarred and divided. (Cut to a side view of Aang as he turns his head towards Zuko) But with the Avatar's help, we can get it back on the (Camera pans to the right to show Zuko looking at his friend) right path, and begin a new era of love and peace.

(Cut to one of the Fire Sages holding the Fire Lord diadem in his hand walking off screen. Cut to a frontal shot of Zuko's legs as he kneels down. Cut to an area behind Aang's leg looking at the Fire Sage standing behind Zuko.)

Fire Sage: All hail (Cut to a close up of Zuko's top knot as the Fire Sage inserts the diadem into it) Fire Lord Zuko!

(The crowd cheers and Zuko lifts his head up as the Fire Sage dismisses himself, keeping his head bowed. Zuko stands up and walks towards the camera. Cut to an overhead shot of the crowd as Zuko enters the screen and gestures Aang to join him. The Avatar enters the screen a split second later and they pose at the top of the steps. They look at each other briefly before looking back at the crowd.

Cut to Zuko walking alone on the rocky path leading to the crater in the Fire Nation capital. Fade to the outer cordon of the prison tower as Zuko makes his way in. Fade to Zuko walking along the corridor inside the prison and pauses outside a door for a second before pushing it. Cut to the inside of the door as it opens to reveal Zuko's face and he walks towards the camera. Cut to a disheveled Ozai in rags leaning against the wall of his cell as Zuko's footsteps grows louder. Cut to a close up of Ozai's face as his eyes glance to the side at the shadow.)

Ozai: I should count myself lucky. (Cut to an area above Zuko's head looking at the cell similar to Iroh's) The new Fire Lord has graced me with his presence in my lonely prison cell.
Zuko:You should count yourself lucky that the Avatar spared your life. (Cut to a close up sideview of Ozai as he makes a "Hmph" sound. Camera slowly pans to the right to reveal Zuko) Banishing me was the best thing you could have done for my life. (Cut to an overhead shot of Ozai's cell) It put me on the right path; perhaps your time in here can do the same for you.
Ozai: (Cut to a close up of a nonchalant Ozai) Why are you really here?
Zuko: (off screen) Because you are gong to tell me something. (Camera zooms in towards Zuko's robe and he kneels down into screen) Where is my mother?

(Cut to the Earth Kingdom symbol on the inner wall of Ba Sing Se. Camera pans up to show an overhead view of the Lower Ring. A sungi horn plays. Cut to the Fire Nation tanks Bumi stacked with an Earth Kingdom flag planted right at the top. A ball enters the screen. Camera pans out to show 2 boys on opposite sides of the tank structure passing the ball to and fro with earthbending. Another boy runs into screen, giggling. Cut to an overhead view of Appa outside Iroh's tea shop.


Cut to Iroh wearing his tea shop outfit playing the sungi horn inside the shop with Appa looking at him through the window. Camera pans to the left slightly and a hand places a tea cup on the table. Cut to Zuko in his tea shop outfit smiling and walking off screen. Camera pans out to show Toph resting her feet on the table in her new Earth Kingdom outfit as she accepts the cup from Zuko who goes around serving tea to everyone on a tray. Aang sits in front of the table manipulating a ball of air up and down as Momo tries to grab it. He is wearing his new monk robes from the coronation scene.

Camera pans further to the left to show Sokka in the foreground writing something with a calligraphy brush and Mai and Suki are playing a game of Pai Sho in the background with Katara looking on. All of them are wearing Earth
Kingdom outfits. Zuko walks towards the game table and Katara picks up a tea cup from the tray.)

Sokka: Zuko, stop moving! (Katara, Mai, Suki and Zuko look towards Sokka in surprise) I'm trying to capture the moment. (Cut to a frontal shot of Sokka looking serious) I wanted (His face softens and he carries on with his work) to do a painting, so we always remember the good times together. (He sticks his tongue out comically as his sister walks into screen)
Katara: That's very thoughtful of you Sokka. (She looks down and her expression changes into a deadpanned look) Wait! (Cut to a crude drawing of a waterbending Katara with "floopy ears". Toph looks like the drawing from her wanted poster in The Runaway and Zuko has long spiky anime-like hair.) Why did you give me Momo's ears?
Sokka: (off screen) Those are your hair loopies.

(Cut to a frontal shot of the table as Zuko, Suki and Mai look enter the screen to check out his drawing. Suki and Zuko look at the painting, unamused.)

Zuko: At least you don't look like a boarcupine. (Cut back to the drawing again showing more of the group. Zuko is drawn next to an angry Mai. Further to the right, Sokka is depicted thrusting his sword into the air behind Suki) My hair's not that spiky!
Mai: (off screen) I look like a man.

(Camera pans to the right to show Suki firebending with her free hand while her other hand is holding a fan. In the background, there's a drawing of Appa with Aang seated on his head. Further to the right, there's a drawing of a big and tall Iroh clutching his large belly.)

Suki: And why did you paint me firebending?
Sokka: (Cut to a frontal shot of the table) I thought it looked more exciting that way.

(Momo jumps onto the table and makes some animal sounds. Camera zooms out to show Aang looking at the group)

Sokka: Oh, you (Everyone turns to look at Momo) think you can do a better job, Momo?

(Cut to a close up of a smiling Aang as he gets up. Cut to an area outside the shop looking in as Aang walks out. Iroh is already at the table while Toph is still walking towards it.)

Iroh: Hey, (pointing at the painting) my belly's not that big anymore, (Aang pats Appa's snout) I've really trimmed down.
Toph: Well, I think (raises her arms into the air) you all look perfect!

(Everyone laughs. Cut to an area in front of the shop looking at a panoramic view of Ba Sing Se at dusk. Aang pauses in front of a railing. Cut to Aang as the camera pans up and moves to the right to reveal Katara walking towards him. Cut to a close up side shot of Katara with a pink flower in her hair as the camera follows her. She pauses at the railing and looks at Aang. He turns his head towards her. Cut to a close up of a blushing Katara.

Cut to a slight overhead frontal shot of both of them as Katara places a hand on Aang's shoulder and they embrace. Cut to a close up of Aang as he opens his eyes. Cut to a smiling Katara. Cut back to the area in front of the shop as they part and look at the sunset. Camera slowly zooms out. Cut to the window of Iroh's tea shop as a string instrument plays in the background. Katara's head enters the screen. Aang enters the screen and smiles at Katara. Katara leans in for a kiss and Aang deepens it.

Cut to a side shot of them as they continue to kiss. Camera zooms in on them and slowly pans up towards the orange and purple sky. Chinese words for "The End" appear on screen followed shortly by the English equivalent at the bottom. The background slowly fades to white and engulfs the words.)



[End Credits]